Case: United States v. Lopez-Moreno
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Date: 2005-08-08
Citation: 420 F.3d 420
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 8937331

KING, Chief Judge:
Defendant-Appellant Eleuterio Lopez-Moreno was convicted of transporting undocumented aliens in furtherance of their illegal presence in the United States. 8 U.S.C. §§ 1324(a) (1) (A) (ii), 1324(a)(1)(A)(v)(II), and 1324(a)(1)(B)(i)(2000). He now appeals the district court’s decision to: (1) deny his motion to suppress evidence against him; (2) deny his motion in limine challenging the admission of documents contained in the passengers’ A-files; and (3) deny his motion for acquittal based on the insufficiency of the evidence against him. We AFFIRM.
I. BACKGROUND
A. Factual Background
1. Preliminary Matters
On the morning of August 21, 2003, Earlton John Parker, a police officer with the Greenwood Police Department in Greenwood, Louisiana, was on a routine traffic patrol. At 2:36 a.m., Officer Parker pulled over a white van because neither of its side brake lights was functioning. Only the van’s center window brake light was operating. Officer Parker testified in court that he believed the non-functioning brake lights violated La.Rev.Stat. Ann. § 32:306A (West 2002), which in 2003 required all motor vehicles registered and operating in Louisiana to have at least two functioning brake lights. Before he initiated the stop, Officer Parker turned on the dashboard-mounted camera in his police cruiser. The entire stop was thus videotaped (with sound). Before pulling over the van, Officer Parker also called in the van’s Texas license plate number to the police dispatcher.
The van that Officer Parker pulled over was owned by Faustino Martinez, the proprietor of El Cadete Autotransportes (“El Cadete”). El Cadete is what is known colloquially in parts of the South Texas Hispanic community as a camioneta. Camionetas are van services that provide point-to-point transportation within the United States and to destinations in Mexico. On the morning in question, the van was driven by Lopez-Moreno, a Mexican citizen and lawful permanent resident of the United States. He had left Houston a few hours earlier with nine passengers who were destined for Atlanta and other locations on the East Coast.
2. Events Before the Warrant Check Came Back Clean
As soon as Lopez-Moreno pulled over, Officer Parker requested his driver’s license. Officer Parker then explained that he had pulled over the van because of problems with the brake lights. Officer Parker next proceeded to ask Lopez-Moreno various questions about the nature of his trip. Officer Parker first asked Lopez-Moreno about his destination. Lopez-Moreno told him that he was going to Atlanta. Officer Parker next asked him who he worked for, to which Lopez-Moreno responded that he worked for the company named on the door of the van. Officer Parker then started questioning Lopez-Moreno about the passengers, including how many there were, who they were, and where they were from. Lopez-Moreno was not certain how many passengers there were and did not know their names, but he told Officer Parker that they were from various places.
With these questions asked, Officer Parker began questioning Lopez-Moreno about the immigration status of his passengers. When asked by Officer Parker if they were present legally in the United States, Lopez-Moreno told him “I guess, I don’t know,” and “I just work for the company.” At that point, Officer Parker again asked Lopez-Moreno where he was taking the passengers. Lopez-Moreno told Officer Parker that he was taking the passengers to various destinations. Parker then asked if they were being taken to work. Lopez-Moreno said that they were going to work at their destinations. Based on these responses, Parker stated to Lopez-Moreno, “Some of them probably ain’t legal.” Although not readily discernible on the videotape, Officer Parker has testified that Lopez-Moreno responded by saying either “might” or “might be.”
At 2:40 a.m., Officer Parker went back to his police cruiser to request a backup officer. He also called in Lopez-Moreno’s driver’s license number to run a check on his license and to see if he had any outstanding warrants. He then went back and continued to question Lopez-Moreno about the details of his trip. While this next round of questioning was proceeding, the dispatcher radioed back to Parker at 2:43 a.m. to tell him that the driver’s license was valid and that she was still checking to see if Lopez-Moreno had any outstanding warrants.
After the dispatcher radioed back, Officer Parker asked Lopez-Moreno about the immigration status of the passengers for either the third or fourth time. Officer Parker stated: “None of them are legal. Be honest with me.” This time, rather than offer a verbal response, Lopez-Moreno shrugged. In response to the shrug, Parker stated “probably not.” Lopez-Moreno then volunteered to go back to the van and retrieve the passenger manifest.
At 2:44 a.m., while Lopez-Moreno was going back to the van, the dispatcher called back and told Parker that there were no outstanding warrants. Parker told the dispatcher to hold onto Lopez-Moreno’s information.
3. Events After the Warrant Check Came Back Clean
When Lopez-Moreno returned from the van, he went over the manifest with Officer Parker to ascertain how many passengers were in the van. They determined that there were nine passengers. This conversation was interrupted at 2:48 a.m., when the backup officer arrived.
Once the backup officer arrived, Officer Parker called United States Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (“BICE”) Special Agent Craig Griffin. Agent Griffin was the Resident Agent in Charge of BICE’s Texarkana, Arkansas office. Agent Griffin had earlier requested the Greenwood Police Department to call them if they suspected that they had undocumented aliens at a traffic stop. Parker explained to Agent Griffin that he had pulled over the van and that LopezAMore-no was paid to drive the passengers to various destinations. Because of a bad connection, Agent Griffin said that he would call back in a few minutes. While Officer Parker was waiting for Agent Griffin to call him back, he can be heard speaking with the other officer about an earlier episode when Officer Parker had participated in a traffic stop of a van of undocumented aliens. He mentioned that the driver of the van in that previous stop had been arrested for transporting illegal aliens. At 2:54 a.m., Agent Griffin called back. Officer Parker again explained the circumstances. While Officer Parker had Agent Griffin on the phone, he handed the phone over to Lopez-Moreno and Agent Griffin spoke briefly with Lopez-Moreno. Agent Griffin asked a few questions, including where Lopez-Moreno was born, where the passengers were from, and what immigration documentation he had on him. Lopez-Moreno told him that he was born in Tampico, Mexico, he did not know where the passengers were from, and he did not have any immigration documents. Based on his conversation with Lopez-Moreno, as well as what Officer Parker had told him, Agent Griffin told Officer Parker to detain Lopez-Moreno and the passengers until he could arrive from about an hour away.
When Agent Griffin arrived on the scene, he first interviewed Lopez-Moreno and then interviewed the passengers. Lopez-Moreno again stated that he was from Mexico. However, at this point he produced a resident alien card, i.e., a green card. Griffin then spoke with the passengers. Because neither Officer Parker nor his backup officer spoke Spanish, Agent Griffin was the first law enforcement officer actually to interact with the passengers. Agent Griffin asked them their names, their place of birth, their country of citizenship, their date and place of entry into the United States, the status of their entry, and their current place of residence. Based on their responses to his questions and the other circumstances he observed, Agent Griffin suspected that they were not present legally in the United States. As a result of Agent Griffin’s investigation, his interview with Lopez-Moreno, and the passengers’ responses, Agent Griffin arrested Lopez-Moreno for suspicion of transporting undocumented aliens. Officer Parker issued him a ticket for failing to comply with Louisiana’s brake lights statute, La.Rev.Stat. Ann. § 32:306A, and for failing to have a vehicle registration slip, in violation of La.Rev.Stat. ANN. § 47:506 (West 2002). BICE also detained the van’s passengers on suspicion of being present in the United States illegally.
B. Procedural Background
On August 27, 2003, a federal grand jury issued a nine-count indictment against Lopez-Moreno charging him with transporting undocumented aliens and with conspiracy to transport said aliens, in furtherance of their illegal presence in the United States and for commercial advantage knowing that they were illegally present, or in reckless disregard of the fact that they were illegally present, in violation of 8 U.S.C. §§ 1324(a)(1)(A)(ii), 1324(a)(1)(A)(v)(II), and 1324(a)(1)(B)(i). The nine counts corresponded to each of the nine passengers in the van.
Immediately after his arraignment on August 27, Lopez-Moreno made several oral motions. In the first motion, Lopez-Moreno’s attorney stated: “I would ask that the Court maintain in custody the [passengers] until I have had a time, a chance to question these people, take their depositions if need be.” The court did not act on the motion but, on the understanding that the passengers would be in custody for some time before being deported, directed Lopez-Moreno’s attorney to confer with the Assistant United States Attorney about the logistics of visiting and deposing the passengers. In response, the Government stated: “[W]e have not asked for material witness warrants on these individuals. They are presently in the Miller County jail in Arkansas.” Lopez-Moreno’s attorney then stated: “I would at least like to know that for the next week they will be maintained in the Miller County jail. After that amount of time, if I discover it is no longer necessary to have them detained and I am satisfied ... that we have no fear in letting them be released, then I can certainly so advise the Court .... ” In the end, the court directed the Government “to do everything that you can to make sure that [the defense is] notified before the individuals named in the indictment are moved from Miller County jail.” On October 3, 2003, seven of the passengers were deported. Although Lopez-Moreno’s attorney knew their location up to that point, she made no attempt to depose them. The eighth passenger was a minor and was staying with a family member pending his deportation hearing. The ninth passenger was released on an immigration bond but failed to appear at her deportation hearing. She was ordered deported in absentia.
On September 12, 2003, Lopez-Moreno filed a motion to suppress all the evidence against him on the grounds that his brake lights were working on the morning of August 21, and thus there was no basis for the initial stop. On October 22, 2003, Lopez-Moreno filed a supplemental motion to suppress, in which he argued that even if the brake lights were not working, the evidence should still be suppressed because: (1) the stop was without legal justification, since the statute that formed the basis of Officer Parker’s stop applied only to vehicles registered in the State of Louisiana; (2) Officer Parker had no authority to enforce immigration laws; (3) Lopez-Moreno was not given his Miranda warning until after the BICE agents arrived on the scene; and (4) Lopez-Moreno did not consent to the detention until after the BICE agents arrived on the scene.
On February 11, 2004, a federal magistrate judge issued a report and recommendation on the motion to suppress, which recommended denial of the motion in all respects. The magistrate judge found that the inapplicability of the Louisiana brake light statute was irrelevant because at the time the stop began, Officer Parker had no way of knowing that the van was registered in Texas. The magistrate judge concluded that Miranda warnings were not required because an officer may ask a few questions as part of a traffic stop without first arresting a motorist. The magistrate judge also found that Lopez-Moreno’s claim as to Officer Parker’s authority to enforce immigration laws did not survive a simple reading of the relevant federal statutes. Finally, the magistrate judge stated that Lopez-Moreno’s consent was unnecessary because Officer Parker had a reasonable basis to suspect that immigration laws had been broken. On February 23, 2004, the district court accepted the magistrate judge’s recommendation and denied the motion to suppress.
On February 23, 2004, the Government indicated its intent to present certain documents drawn from each of the passengers’ “A-files” as evidence at trial. An A-file is the Government’s official file on each alien for whom it has information. The Government acknowledged that the A-files contained sworn statements from the passengers, but the Government was explicit that it had no intention of introducing the statements into evidence. The same day, Lopez-Moreno filed a motion in limine arguing that the court should not admit any documents drawn from the A-files. Lopez-Moreno claimed that “the use of such documents (which are clearly hearsay) to prove the alienage element of the crime violates his rights to Due Process under the Fifth Amendment, as well as his Right to Confrontation as set forth in the Sixth Amendment .... ”
On February 24, 2004, immediately before the trial started, the court heard oral arguments on Lopez-Moreno’s motion in limine. In court, Lopez-Moreno’s attorney reiterated the arguments made in the motion and memorandum. His attorney stated: “I filed this motion in limine to ask the Court to deny the Government’s use of the A-files, as well as any of the other documents that are incorporated into the A-files which might have been previously executed or created by the government agents.” In response, the Government acknowledged that the A-files contained certain documents such as witness statements and interview notes, but it again stated that it would not introduce them at trial. The court ruled that the A-files were admissible, with the exception that the admissibility of any documents containing in-culpatory statements by the passengers would be addressed later if the Government sought to introduce them.
Later that same day, February 24, Lopez-Moreno’s trial began. The Government’s chief witnesses against Lopez-Moreno were Officer Parker and Agent Griffin. At trial, Lopez-Moreno had a standing objection against the introduction of any materials from the A-files. With one exception, each time a document from an A-file was introduced, Lopez-Moreno objected on the grounds stated in the motion in limine, i.e., that introduction of documents from the A-files violated the rule against hearsay and his right to confront the witnesses against him. The district court overruled the standing objection each time it was made.
On February 25, the Government rested, and Lopez-Moreno made an oral motion for a judgment of acquittal, which the district court denied. On February 26, the jury began its deliberations, and the next day it returned a guilty verdict on all counts. On March 5, 2004, Lopez-Moreno filed a written motion for judgment of acquittal or, in the alternative, a new trial based on his allegation that the prosecution failed to offer admissible evidence that could support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In this motion, he largely restated the arguments made in his motion in limine. On June 4, 2004, the motion for acquittal was denied. On June 10, 2004, Lopez-Moreno was sentenced to eighteen months imprisonment, followed by two years of supervised release.
On June 24, 2004, Lopez-Moreno filed the instant appeal. On appeal, Lopez-Moreno argues that the district court committed reversible error in denying his motion to suppress because: (1) the traffic s

[truncated for spike corpus]