Case: United States v. Santa
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
Date: 1999-06-02
Citation: 180 F.3d 20
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11661176

SOTOMAYOR, Circuit Judge:
Defendant-appellant Anthony Santa appeals from a judgment of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York (Parker, J.) convicting him, following a bench trial, of violating 21 U.S.C. §§ 812, 841(a)(1) and 841(b)(1)(C) by possessing crack cocaine with intent to distribute. In April 1997, officers of the Spring Valley Police Department arrested Santa and seized from his possession several dozen plastic bags containing crack cocaine. The officers made this arrest based on a police computer record, which indicated that Santa was wanted on an outstanding warrant. Unbeknownst to the arresting officers, however, the warrant had been vacated seventeen months earlier, but remained in the statewide police computer network because court employees failed to notify the proper law enforcement agency to remove it.
Prior to trial, Santa moved to suppress the drug evidence, arguing that it was the product of an unlawful arrest on an invalid warrant. The district court denied Santa’s motion on the basis of the Supreme Court’s decision in Arizona v. Evans, 514 U.S. 1, 115 S.Ct. 1185, 131 L.Ed.2d 34 (1995), which established an exception to the exclusionary rule where law enforcement officers rely on police records that contain erroneous information resulting from clerical errors of court employees. Santa contends on appeal that the Evans exception does not apply under the circumstances of this case. We disagree and affirm the judgment of the district court.
BACKGROUND
I. The Arrest Warrant
Spring Valley, New York is a village located entirely within the Town of Rama-po. The Spring Valley Police Department and the Ramapo Police Department are both authorized to make arrests in Spring Valley. The two departments are,-however, separate agencies that operate independently of one another. The Spring Valley Village Court (“Village Court”) has jurisdiction over cases arising in Spring Valley.
On August 13, 1995, Ramapo Town Police Officer John Lynch arrested Santa in Spring Valley in connection with an alleged theft and assault that occurred in Ramapo. Police subsequently searched a vehicle involved in the crime and recovered a jacket containing eight vials of a white powder that field-tested positive for cocaine. Officer Lynch transported Santa to the Ramapo Police Department and prepared a criminal complaint charging Santa with petty larceny, assault, criminal impersonation and criminal possession of a controlled substance. These charges were filed on the same day in the local criminal court in Ramapo. On October 5, 1995, however, at the direction of the Assistant District Attorney for Rockland County, Officer Lynch refiled the criminal impersonation and criminal possession charges in the Spring Valley Village Court.
On October 23, 1995, the Village Court, for reasons not apparent from the record, issued a warrant directing the Ramapo Police Department to arrest Santa on the criminal impersonation and possession charges. Three days later, the Ramapo Town Police, as the complaining law enforcement agency with respect to these charges, entered the warrant in the New York State Police Information Network (“NYSPIN”), a statewide computer database that contains outstanding warrants and other information relevant to law enforcement. Two weeks later, on November 8, 1995, the Village Court issued a request to vacate the warrant. The Village Court, however, misdirected the request to the Spring Valley rather than the Ramapo Police Department.
Typically, when the Spring Valley Police Department receives a request to vacate a warrant, the desk officer or dispatcher on duty first determines whether the Spring Valley Police Department is the complaining agency. If it is, the desk officer or dispatcher promptly removes the warrant from NYSPIN and then forwards the va-catur request to the records officers, who delete the warrant from the internal sta-tionhouse computer. The internal computer contains only those warrants that belong to the Spring Valley Police Department, ié., warrants as to which the Spring Valley Police Department is the complaining agency.
Once every few months, as in this case, the Spring Valley Police Department mistakenly receives a request to vacate a warrant belonging to another police department. Only the complaining law enforcement agency that initially enters a warrant in NYSPIN is authorized to remove it. Thus, when the Spring Valley Police Department receives a misdirected vacatur request:
[i]t is [the] Department’s practice to return the request to the Village Court where it can be directed to the complaining party. [The Department] sometimes also send[s] or fax[es] a copy directly to the complaining party as a courtesy.
The Village Court and the Spring Valley Police Department are located across the hall from each other in the same building, and warrants and warrant vacatur requests are typically hand-delivered.
The record contains no direct evidence of whether the Spring Valley Police Department followed its practice in this case. The record is clear, however, that the Village Court never sent its request to vacate Santa’s warrant to the Ramapo Police Department. In April 1996, the Ramapo Town Police, unaware that the Village Court had vacated the warrant, lodged the warrant at the Otisville Correctional Facility (“Otisville”), where Santa was incarcerated for an unrelated parole violation. On April 10, 1996, Santa wrote to the Ramapo Justice Court seeking a “final disposition” of the criminal impersonation and possession charges that had been filed in connection with his August 8, 1995 arrest. The Ramapo Justice Court made a notation on Santa’s letter that the charges had been dismissed, and returned the letter to Santa at Otisville. Otisville then contacted May-lin Ward, Senior Clerk of the Court, who confirmed that the case against Santa had been dismissed on November 8, 1995. On April 18, 1996, Otisville returned the warrant to the Village Court along with a letter noting that the case had been dismissed. The Village Court apparently took no further action with respect to the warrant.
II. The Arrest
On April 9, 1997, after Santa was released from Otisville, Spring Valley Police Officer Jorge Marciano observed Santa at the Spring Valley bus station, a “known ... drug trafficking location.” Officer Marciano recognized Santa, but did not know his name. Marciano was aware, however, that Santa had been the subject of previous criminal investigations. Marciano approached another officer on the scene, Officer Gibson, who knew Santa by name. Gibson radioed the dispatcher at the Spring Valley Police Station and requested a “wanted person check” on Santa. The dispatcher checked NYSPIN and learned that Santa was wanted by the Ramapo Town Police on an outstanding arrest warrant. The dispatcher then contacted the Ramapo Police Department, which verified that according to its records, the warrant was still active. The Ramapo Police Department also faxed a copy of the warrant to the Spring Valley Police Department. The dispatcher radioed this information back to Officers Marciano and Gibson at the bus station.
Officer Marciano later observed Santa leaving the bus station in a taxi. Marciano stopped the taxi and arrested Santa on the purportedly outstanding warrant. Incident to Santa’s arrest, the officers searched Santa and seized approximately fifty clear plastic bags, approximately thirty of which contained a white, “chunky” substance that appeared and was later confirmed to be crack cocaine. The officers then took Santa to the Spring Valley Police Station to process his arrest. After he was arrested and the drug evidence seized, Santa informed the officers that his arrest warrant had been vacated, but the court was closed and the officers were unable to verify the status of the warrant.
III. The District Court Proceedings
Santa was indicted on September 18, 1997, in federal court on one count of possessing approximately 2.95 grams of crack cocaine with intent to distribute, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 812, 841(a)(1) and 814(b)(1)(C). Prior to trial, Santa moved to suppress the drug evidence and dismiss the indictment. Santa claimed that the arrest and search violated his rights under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution because the warrant that provided the basis for the arrest had been vacated seventeen months earlier. Santa argued that the evidence seized incident to his arrest should therefore be suppressed as “fruit of the poisonous tree.” In response, the government argued that even though the warrant had been vacated, the arresting officers acted in objectively reasonable reliance on the NYSPIN record. Because court employees were responsible for the failure to remove Santa’s warrant from NYSPIN, the government contended, suppression was unwarranted under Evans, 514 U.S. at 14-16, 115 S.Ct. 1185, in which the Supreme Court announced an exception to the exclusionary rule where police officers act in objectively reasonable reliance on erroneous police records resulting from “clerical errors of court employees.”
The district court referred Santa’s motion to Magistrate Judge George A. Yanth-is, who held an evidentiary hearing on December 17, 1997, at which Officers Marciano and Lynch testified. Officer Marciano testified that at the time of Santa’s arrest, he was not aware that the warrant had been vacated, nor did the other arresting officers indicate in any manner that they believed the warrant had been vacated. In addition, Officers Marciano and Lynch both testified that they had never before arrested a suspect based on a warrant listed in NYSPIN, only to learn later that the warrant had been vacated.
On February 3, 1998, Magistrate Judge Yanthis filed a Report and Recommendation advising the district court to deny Santa’s motion. The magistrate judge found “no indication that the arresting officers from the Spring Valley Police Department were not acting objectively reasonably] in relying upon the erroneous NYSPIN record.” The magistrate judge further found that
[wjhenever requested to vacate warrants to which they are not the complaining agency, it is the policy of the Spring Valley Police Department to return the request to the [Vjillage [Cjourt where it can be directed to the proper agency.... Although there was no direct evidence that such action was taken by the Spring Valley Police Department, the Court finds that said routine practice was followed and that the practice is a reasonable one. See Fed.R.Evid. 406. The Court finds that the Spring Valley Village Court failed to redirect the request to vacate the arrest warrant to the proper agency, the Ramapo Police Department. ... As such, the erroneous computer record relied upon by the Spring Valley Police Department stems directly from the Spring Valley Village Court’s failure to notify the Town of Ramapo Police Department that the warrant was vacated.
Based on his finding that the error that led to Santa’s arrest on a vacated warrant “was made by court personnel, not law enforcement,” Magistrate Judge Yanthis concluded that the drug evidence seized incident to the arrest was admissible under the reasoning of Evans, 514 U.S. at 14-16, 115 S.Ct. 1185.
On April 21, 1998, the district court adopted the magistrate judge’s Report and Recommendation and denied Santa’s motion, finding that
[tjhe errors that admittedly occurred in failing to properly vacate the original warrant were those of court personnel, and not of the police. While the fact that these errors occurred and were not corrected is quite troubling, this Court is bound by Arizona v. Evans ....
On May 27, 1998, after a one-day bench trial on stipulated facts, the district court convicted Santa of possessing crack cocaine with intent to distribute. The court sentenced Santa to a thirty-month prison term. This appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
I. The Standard ofRevieiv
In reviewing a district court’s denial of'a motion to suppress evidence, we review the district court’s factual findings for clear error and its legal conclusions de novo. See United States v. Miller, 148 F.3d 207, 213 (2d Cir.1998), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 119 S.Ct. 804, 142 L.Ed.2d 665 (1999). Although we must “view the evidence in the light most favorable to the government,” id., we are mindful that where, as here, the government asserts the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule, “[tjhe burden is on the government to demonstrate the objective reasonableness of the officers’ good faith reliance.” United States v. George, 975 F.2d 72, 77 (2d Cir.1992). We review that legal question de novo. Id.
II. The Evans Exception to the Exclusionary Rule
“The exclusionary rule generally prohibits admission at trial of evidence seized in searches deemed unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment, as well as of derivative evidence acquired as an indirect product or result of the unlawful search.” United States v. Eng, 971 F.2d 854, 859 (2d Cir.1992) (citations omitted). The Supreme Court has, however, recognized a good faith exception to the exclusionary rule. In United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 104 S.Ct. 3405, 82 L.Ed.2d 677 (1984), the Court held that evidence seized in objectively reasonable reliance on a search warrant that is subsequently declared invalid should not be excluded. See also George, 975 F.2d at 77.
The critical question in this case is whether the drug evidence seized from Santa was admissible under an extension of this good faith exception, as set forth in Evans, 514 U.S. at 14-16, 115 S.Ct. 1185. In Evans, the Court held that the good faith exception also applies to evidence seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment by an officer acting in objectively reasonable reliance on an erroneous police record indicating the existence of an outstanding arrest warrant, so long as court employees were responsible for the error. Id. at 8-4, 16, 115 S.Ct. 1185. The police officer in Evans had run a computer check, which revealed that the defendant was wanted on an outstanding misdemeanor warrant. Id. at 4, 115 S.Ct. 1185. The officer arrested the defendant based on the computer record and, in the course of the arrest, discovered marijuana in his possession. Id. Court clerks subsequently discovered, however, that the arrest warrant identified in the computer record had been vacated seventeen days prior to the arrest. Id. The warrant was not removed from the police computer files because court employees failed to notify the sheriffs office that the warrant had been quashed. Id. at 5, 115 S.Ct. 1185. Once the court clerks discovered this error, they immediately corrected it and searched their files to ensure that no similar mistakes had occurred. Id. at 15, 115 S.Ct. 1185. This type of error occurred only once every three or four years. Id.
In determining whether the exclusionary rule applied under these circumstances, the Court noted initially that “[t]he exclusionary rule operates as a judicially created remedy designed to safeguard against future violations of Fourth Amendment rights through the rule’s general deterrent effect.” Id. at 10, 115 S.Ct. 1185. “[T]he rule’s application has [thus] been restricted to those instances where its remedial objectives are thought most efficaciously served.” Id. at 11, 115 S.Ct. 1185. “Where ‘the exclusionary rule does not result in appreciable deterrence, then, clearly, its use ... is unwarranted.’ ” Id. (quoting United States v. Janis, 428 U.S. 433, 454, 96 S.Ct. 3021, 49 L.Ed.2d 1046 (1976)) (alteration in original).
The Court then relied on three factors to support its conclusion that application of the exclusionary rule would not result in appreciable deterrence in the context of an erroneous computer record generated by court employees. First, the Court noted that “the exclusionary rule was historically designed as a means of deterring police misconduct, not mistakes by court employees.” Id. at 14, 115 S.Ct. 1185. Se

[truncated for spike corpus]