Case: Ward v. Dretke
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Date: 2005-08-09
Citation: 420 F.3d 479
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 8937787

PATRICK E. HIGGINBOTHAM, Circuit Judge:
Claiming that he had received ineffective assistance of counsel, Bernard Ward sought relief under 28 U.S.C. § 2254 from his conviction and sentence by a Texas court for indecency with a child, sexual assault, aggravated sexual assault, and possession of child pornography. The federal district court denied relief as to his conviction, but granted Ward’s petition as to his sentence. Ward and the State filed cross-appeals, and the district court granted Ward’s motion for COA. We hold that the district court correctly denied Ward’s petition as to his conviction, but erred in granting his petition as to his sentence.
I
In August 1993, Shannon Grant, then age 13, and his mother, Patti Love, moved into a house in Williamson County, Texas. The house was located next door to Bernard Ward, a single male. Ward befriended the family, and began working with Grant in an effort to improve his performance at school. He also encouraged Grant to stop abusing illegal drugs. As their friendship progressed, Ward began allowing Grant to spend the night at his house, purchased time for him on a web-based video game, and took him to Big Bend National Park. In addition to these innocuous activities, Ward allowed Grant to view pornographic videos. Grant also discovered a number of Playboy and Hustler magazines in Ward’s attic. Roughly eighteen months into their friendship, Ward encouraged Grant to enter into a sexual relationship with him. The two engaged in sexual acts four or five times, after which Grant refused to participate further.
Roughly one month after these sexual encounters began, Ward leased a room in his house to Grant’s best friend, Mike Car-ta. Carta was 18 years old at the time. Grant also introduced Ward to one of his friends from school, Adam Clouse. Clouse, who was twelve or thirteen years old at the time, began frequenting Ward’s house along with Grant. Ward ultimately invited Clouse to participate in sexual activity with him, resulting in a number of sexual encounters over an eight-day period. Finally, Ward was introduced to Chad Wright, another friend of Grant’s. Ward made a number of passes at Wright, and attempted to initiate a sexual encounter. Wright quickly stopped the encounter and refused to participate in further sexual activity with Ward.
When Grant first met Ward, Ward owned a personal computer. Ward allowed Grant access to his personal computer on a regular basis. Eventually, Grant’s use of Ward’s computer became so excessive that Ward purchased Grant his own computer. Shortly thereafter, Ward discovered the internet and purchased a second new computer for his own use. Ward quickly became addicted to internet pornography, including child pornography and photographs of adult bestiality. He would download files containing pornographic pictures from the internet and store the files in folders marked “Animals, Boy/Girl, Female, Male, Male 10 to 13, Male 13 to 16, Male 7 to 10, Male in Briefs, and Celeb Boys.”
Ward attempted to hide his use of internet pornography from the boys who frequented his home, but his furtiveness ultimately piqued the suspicions of Grant and Carta. One day while Ward was away, Grant used a password to log onto Ward’s computer, and he and Carta accessed the files containing child pornography and photographs of bestiality. Rightly disgusted and disturbed, Carta reported Ward to the police. On September 24, 1996, Carta spoke with detectives Dan Le-May and Mary Ryle of the Round Rock Police Department and told them that he had observed child pornography on Ward’s computer. The next day, LeMay and Ryle accompanied Carta to Ward’s house while Ward was away. Carta let them into the house, logged onto Ward’s computer, and showed them the child pornography. At that point, LeMay and Ryle turned Ward’s computer off and prepared a search warrant. They returned later that day and seized Ward’s computer along with pornographic videos, magazines, condoms and K-Y Jelly. Ward was arrested on charges of possessing child pornography and was subsequently released after posting bond.
On September 27, Clouse went to the Round Rock Police Department and informed LeMay that Ward had sexually assaulted him on numerous occasions. Further investigation revealed the abuse of Grant and Wright. Ward was arrested again and indicted for possession of child pornography, indecency with a child, and multiple counts of sexual assault, and charged in a second indictment with multiple counts of aggravated sexual assault. Ward elected to have a jury assess punishment in both cases, and filed a motion to suppress evidence based upon an illegal search.
During this time, Ward’s counsel, Hugh Lowe, devised a defense strategy aimed at securing either probation or the most lenient prison sentence possible. As part of this strategy, Lowe sought to have the cases against Ward consolidated into a single trial. The prosecutor agreed to consolidate in exchange for a guilty plea, a confession from Ward, and the name of Ward’s testifying expert. Ward agreed to plead guilty, and Lowe disclosed the name of Ward’s expert, Dr. Collier Cole, a psychologist specializing in the treatment of sex offenders. Dr. Cole had treated Ward for seven months prior to his trial. Lowe also declined to pursue the earlier filed suppression motion.
In addition to taking these steps, Lowe determined that a posture of complete openness was the proper approach to take at Ward’s sentencing. Prior to trial, Lowe had Ward prepare a lengthy written statement detailing his life up to the point of his incarceration. The statement included Ward’s account of the charged offenses, a summary of his employment history, an account of his troubled childhood, and a summary of his use and sale of illegal drugs many years before trial. Lowe provided the written statement to Dr. Cole with the knowledge that it would be subpoenaed by the State.
Pursuant to his openness strategy, Lowe also failed to object when the State sought to admit photographs of bestiality that were stored on Ward’s computer. Neither did he object when the prosecutor solicited testimony that of the 4,100 probationers in Williamson County, not one was on probation granted by a jury for aggravated sexual assault.
Lowe did lodge an objection when, in response to testimony by Dr. Cole that it was not uncommon for a sex offender to be required to place a sign in his yard announcing his status, the prosecutor inquired whether a judge had ever required that the names, addresses and telephone numbers of jurors be placed on the sign if they gave the sex offender probation. However, Lowe opted not to request a curative instruction or move for a mistrial.
Lowe’s passive approach continued throughout the State’s closing argument, during which the prosecutor made a number of inflammatory remarks. The prosecutor quoted extensively from the Bible and discussed attitude about crime in Williamson County compared to that in other putatively less hospitable Texas counties. Lowe failed to object to these statements.
Following deliberation, the jury returned a verdict of four concurrent 20-year sentences, one 10-year sentence, three concurrent 60-year sentences for aggravated sexual assault, and a number of fines. Ward’s sentence was affirmed on direct appeal, and his petition for discretionary review was denied. On November 27, 2000, Ward filed a state habeas application alleging ineffective assistance of counsel. The State responded by filing a one-page general denial and an affidavit by Lowe. Ward’s application was considered by the same judge who presided over his trial. After making findings of fact and conclusions of law, the judge recommended that relief be denied. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals denied relief without issuing a written opinion.
Ward filed a petition under 28 U.S.C. § 2254 in the District Court for the Western District of Texas, Austin Division. The federal magistrate recommended that all relief be denied. Oral argument was then held before the district court. The court denied relief on Ward’s claim that his trial counsel was ineffective in failing to challenge the search and seizure of his computer files prior to his guilty plea, finding that this claim was barred because he had not made a showing that his plea was involuntary.
The court granted relief, however, on Ward’s claim that his trial counsel was ineffective at sentencing. The court identified five instances of ineffectiveness by Lowe: (1) his failure to request a curative instruction or move for a mistrial after the prosecutor queried whether the names of jurors had ever been placed on a sign in a sex offender’s front yard in response to a sentence of probation; (2) his failure to make efforts to keep the portion of Ward’s statement regarding unadjudicated drug offenses out of evidence; (3) his failure to object to the introduction of photographs of bestiality; (4) his failure to object to testimony regarding the absence of probationers in Williamson County granted probation by a jury after being convicted of aggravated sexual assault; and (5) his failure to object to improper jury argument by the prosecutor. The court found that there was a reasonable probability that but for these errors, Ward’s sentence would have been different.
Ward filed an unsuccessful motion to alter or amend the judgment. The State filed a notice of appeal from the judgment, and Ward filed a motion for COA and a notice of appeal from the order denying his motion to alter or amend. Ward’s motion for COA was granted by the district court.
II
Under 28 U.S.C. § 2254, Ward is entitled to federal habeas relief only if he can demonstrate that the state court’s adjudication of his ineffective assistance claims
(1) resulted in a decision that was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States; or
(2) resulted in a decision that was based on an unreasonable determination of the facts in light of the evidence presented in the State court proceeding.
A state court’s adjudication constitutes an “unreasonable application” when the court identifies the correct governing legal principle from Supreme Court’s decisions, but applies that principle to the facts of a particular case in an objectively unreasonable way.
We examine the federal habeas court’s factual findings for clear error and determinations of law de novo. An ineffective assistance of counsel claim “presents a mixed question of law and fact.” “When examining mixed questions of law and fact, we also utilize a de novo standard by independently applying the law to the facts found by the district court, as long as the district court’s factual determinations are not clearly erroneous.”
Reviewing the state habeas court’s rejection of Ward’s state petition, the district court found that Ward was not entitled to relief on his ineffective assistance claim with respect to his guilty plea, but held that Ward was entitled to relief on his claim that Lowe was ineffective at sentencing. We address these issues in turn.
A
Ward contends that the district court erred when it rejected his claim that Lowe was ineffective for abandoning a meritorious motion to suppress evidence of child pornography seized after an illegal search of his computer. Ward claims that had he been properly informed of the law governing search and seizure, he would not have pled guilty and would have pressed Lowe to pursue the suppression motion.
Our review of Ward’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim is governed by the familiar test of Strickland v. Washington: deficient performance and prejudice. To prove deficient performance, “a petitioner must demonstrate that counsel’s representation ‘fell below an objective standard of reasonableness.’ ” We must “accord substantial deference to counsel’s performance, applying the strong presumption that counsel performed adequately and exercised reasonable professional judgment.” To establish prejudice, a petitioner must “show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.”
When a petitioner challenges the voluntariness of his guilty plea entered pursuant to the advice of counsel on ineffective assistance grounds, he must establish that his counsel’s advice fell below the range of competence demanded of an attorney in a criminal case. Further, he must .show prejudice by establishing that “but for his counsel’s alleged erroneous advice, he would not have pleaded guilty but would have insisted upon going to trial.” This assessment will turn partially on “a prediction of what the outcome of a trial might have been.”
Ward urges that Lowe rendered ineffective assistance by failing to adequately investigate whether the search and seizure of Ward’s computer files was illegal under the Fourth Amendment and Texas law. Ward asserts that had Lowe provided minimal legal investigation, he would have discovered that all evidence yielded by the search, including statements by the boys regarding the sexual assaults, was inadmissible. Had Lowe informed him of this, Ward claims that he would have directed Lowe to “push the suppression motion to the limit, more likely than not securing a dismissal of all charges.”
We are not persuaded. The record contains no indication that Lowe failed to conduct an adequate investigation into the law and facts relevant to the suppression motion. In addition, Ward cannot establish that Lowe performed in a deficient manner by failing to seek suppression of evidence related to the sexual assault and aggravated sexual assault charges. We have held that “counsel’s failure to move to suppress evidence, when the evidence would have been suppressed if objected to, can constitute deficient performance.” Assuming arguendo that the search and seizure precipitated by Carta’s actions was unlawful, Ward would have been unable to suppress evidence that he committed multiple sexual assaults against Grant and multiple aggravated sexual assaults against Clouse because this evidence was not obtained as a result of the allegedly unlawful police activity.
Ward argues that suppression of Clouse and Grant’s testimony would have been appropriate under the “fruit of the poisonous tree” doctrine, which provides that “all evidence derived from the exploitation of an illegal seizure must be suppressed, unless the government shows that there was a break in the chain of events sufficient to refute the inference that the evidence was a product of the Fourth Amendment violation.” The test for determining whether evidence is inadmissible as fruit of the poisonous tree is “whether, granting establishment of the primary illegality, the evidence to which instant objection is made has been come at by exploitation of that illegality or instead by means sufficiently distinguishable to be purged of the primary taint.” Evidence that would otherwise be suppressible as fruit of the poisonous tree is purged of the primary taint “if it derives from an independent source, if the link to the illegally secured evidence is attenuated, or if it would inevitably have been discovered without the aid of the illegally obtained evidence.”
When Ward was first arrested following the seizure of materials from his house, he was charged only with possessing child pornography. Ward did not disclose that he had been involved in sexual relationships with minor children. Two days after the search, Adam Clouse was taken by his father, Chuck Clouse, to the Round Rock Police Station where he disclosed that he had been sexually abused by Ward. An arrest warrant was prepared and Ward was re-arrested and charged with aggravated sexual assault. Importantly, there is no indication that Clouse’s revelation was the product of police e

[truncated for spike corpus]