Case: United States v. Brown
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Date: 2007-08-22
Citation: 500 F.3d 48
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 3699475

SELYA, Senior Circuit Judge.
A jury convicted defendant-appellant Gary Brown of possessing a controlled substance with intent to distribute. On appeal, the defendant challenges his conviction on two grounds, one relating to the denial of his pretrial motion to suppress and the other relating to the exclusion of certain evidence at trial. He also challenges his mandatory minimum life sentence, raising an apparent issue of first impression as to whether, for purposes of 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1), “attempt” offenses are considered “felony drug offenses” (and, therefore, may count as predicate offenses on which to base a recidivist sentencing enhancement). Discerning no error in the district court’s handling of these various matters, we affirm the judgment below.
I. BACKGROUND
We rehearse here only those facts necessary to place this appeal in perspective.
On July 7, 2005, Kevin Cashman, a Lew-iston police officer assigned to the Maine Drug Enforcement Agency (MDEA), received a tip about an imminent narcotics transaction. Although Cashman’s confidential informant (the Cl) had been cooperating with the MDEA for less than a week, he already had provided Cashman with trustworthy information about sellers, transporters, and users of drugs in the Portland area.
The substance of the tip was as follows. The Cl told Cashman that a black male known as “Pink” traveled weekly by bus from New York City to Maine to peddle between ten and twenty ounces of crack and powdered cocaine. He further stated that Pink’s usual praxis was to stay in a hotel off the Maine Turnpike. The room that he used would be rented under the name of Tanguay (David or Peter). The Cl explained that David Tanguay was currently incarcerated and that his brother, Peter, sometimes used David’s identification. Other than skin color, the Cl provided no physical description of the putative drug peddler.
The Cl subsequently advised Cashman that “Pink” had arrived in Portland and was staying in a hotel near the Maine Turnpike. Cashman and another officer proceeded to the Ramada Inn, off former Exit 8 of the Maine Turnpike, and learned that room 127 had been rented in the name of David Tanguay. Comparison of the signatures on the registration form and the identification used in renting the room revealed marked discrepancies.
Cashman called a police dispatcher and corroborated David Tanguay’s current status as a federal prison inmate. The officers then obtained access to a room diagonally across from room 127 and conducted a five-hour stake-out. While they observed a black man go in and out of room 127, limitations on their surveillance capabilities rendered them unable to identify the man.
Three weeks later, the Cl told Cashman that Pink was en route to Portland on board a Vermont Transit bus from New York City. He said that the wayfarer would arrive that afternoon and would be picked up at the bus station by Peter Tanguay. Tanguay would be driving an old green pick-up truck, plate number 760-409, belonging to the CL The Cl assured Cashman that Pink would be transporting his wonted wares. He explained that he was privy to this information because he had spoken with Peter Tanguay when the latter asked to borrow his truck.
In response to this lead, Cashman called in a fellow officer, who searched both the Cl and his truck to ensure the absence of any preexisting contraband. The Cl drove away and the officers tailed the truck. They saw Peter Tanguay enter it. After the truck made several stops, Tanguay drove away alone. The officers continued to follow the truck until it reached the bus terminal.
At 3:30 p.m., the officers saw a Vermont Transit bus arrive from New York City. They watched a black man alight carrying two large duffel bags. The man walked to the truck, placed the duffel bags in the cab, and climbed aboard.
By prearrangement, two Portland police cruisers converged on the truck a short distance from the bus terminal. Officer Robert Bickford directed the passenger to disembark, frisked him, and asked for his name and date of birth. The passenger identified himself as Anthony Green, gave a date of birth, and claimed to be from Boston. He appeared older than the proffered date of birth suggested. Moreover, he professed to have no identification and, when asked how to spell his name, he hesitated.
Bickford tried unsuccessfully to verify the passenger’s stated identity using the computer in his cruiser. He eventually asked the man for his social security number, but “Green” said that he did not remember it. When Cashman showed up, he inquired as to the ownership of the duffel bags. Tanguay claimed ownership and Green, in an apparent effort to substantiate that claim, stated that the bags had been in the truck when he arrived. The surveilling officers knew that statement to be untrue.
The officers (whom the magistrate judge credited) asserted that throughout this exchange Green was constantly looking around, as if looking for a way to escape. When asked a second time for identification, he tried to peer into Bickford’s notebook, as if trying to recollect the name that he had given.
A canine unit arrived at the scene around thirty minutes after the stop was effected. A trained “drug dog” reacted to a scent emanating from the cab of the truck and, later, alerted to one of the duffel bags. The bag was found to contain 340 grams of crack cocaine as well as numerous small bags of marijuana. A search of the truck’s glove compartment revealed additional cocaine. Both the driver (Peter Tanguay) and the passenger were arrested. Police subsequently identified the passenger as Gary Brown.
On August 25, 2005, a federal grand jury returned a one-count indictment charging the defendant with possessing 50 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing cocaine base on July 29, 2005, with intent to distribute, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1). Early in the case, the defendant moved to suppress all the evidence acquired at the scene of the roadside stop. The district court referred that motion to a magistrate judge.
After conducting an evidentiary hearing, the magistrate judge found the stop, the ensuing searches, and the defendant’s arrest justified. See United States v. Brown, Crim. No. 05-70, 2006 WL 149031, at *4-7 (D.Me. Jan.17, 2006). In his view, the information provided by the Cl possessed sufficient indicia of reliability to support stopping the truck, id. at *5; the defendant lacked standing to challenge the search of either the truck or the duffel bags, id. at *6; and the police had probable cause to effect a warrantless arrest, id. at *7.
The defendant objected to the magistrate judge’s factual findings and legal conclusions. The district court nonetheless adopted the report and recommendation and denied the motion to suppress. United States v. Brown, Crim. No. 05-70, 2006 WL 348318 (D.Me. Feb. 14, 2006).
Following a trial, a jury found the defendant guilty. The court sentenced him to life in prison as a career offender. This timely appeal ensued.
II. ANALYSIS
On appeal, the defendant assigns error to the denial of his pretrial motion to suppress, the exclusion of certain evidence at trial, and the sentence imposed. We consider these assigned errors sequentially.
A. Motion to Suppress.
When reviewing a district court’s disposition of a motion to suppress, we accept the court’s findings of fact unless they are clearly erroneous and subject its conclusions of law (including its ultimate conclusions as to constitutionality) to de novo review. Ornelas v. United States, 517 U.S. 690, 699, 116 S.Ct. 1657, 134 L.Ed.2d 911 (1996); United States v. Coplin, 463 F.3d 96, 100 (1st Cir.2006). Here, the suppression motion challenged the constitutionality of both the initial traffic stop and the subsequent arrest. Consequently, we address those two components separately.
1. The Stop. The Fourth Amendment protects persons from unreasonable searches and seizures. U.S. Const, amend. IV. The protection against unreasonable seizures extends to investigatory stops, including vehicle stops. See Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 653, 99 S.Ct. 1391, 59 L.Ed.2d 660 (1979); United States v. Chhien, 266 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir.2001). Passengers in a motor vehicle subjected to a traffic stop are deemed seized for Fourth Amendment purposes and, thus, are entitled to challenge the constitutionality of the stop. See Brendlin v. Cali fornia, — U.S. -, 127 S.Ct. 2400, 2406-07, 168 L.Ed.2d 132 (2007).
In Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968), the Supreme Court established the baseline test for determining the constitutionality of such detentions. Police officers may lawfully effect an investigatory stop as long as they can “point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant” such an intrusion. Id. at 21, 88 S.Ct. 1868; see United States v. Romain, 393 F.3d 63, 71 (1st Cir.2004).
While the reasonable suspicion standard requires more than a visceral hunch about the presence of illegal activity, it requires less than probable cause. Chhien, 266 F.3d at 6. By the same token, reasonable suspicion can flourish in the absence of a direct evidentiary link between the suspect and the suspected crime. See United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 101 S.Ct. 690, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981). In practice, then, the constitutional validity of a stop must be evaluated through a broad-based consideration of all the attendant circumstances. See Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 500, 103 S.Ct. 1319, 75 L.Ed.2d 229 (1983); Chhien, 266 F.3d at 6. In this process, the circumstances underlying the stop “must be seen and weighed not in terms of library analysis by scholars, but as understood by those versed in the field of law enforcement.” Cortez, 449 U.S. at 418, 101 S.Ct. 690.
Here, the defendant contends that the police lacked a reasonable and articula-ble basis for the roadside stop because they relied exclusively on a tip provided by an unproven informant. Courts have paid close attention to the use of informants’ tips. Even though such tips comprise an important weapon in the armamentarium of law enforcement, see, e.g., Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 237-38, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983), their use entails a risk that police action may be predicated on malicious or unfounded reports. Thus, if informant information is to provide reasonable suspicion sufficient to ground an investigatory stop, it must possess adequate indicia of reliability. Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 332, 110 S.Ct. 2412, 110 L.Ed.2d 301 (1990).
The reliability inquiry—like the reasonable suspicion inquiry itself—must be made in light of the totality of the circumstances. Gates, 462 U.S. at 230, 103 S.Ct. 2317. While “an informant’s ‘veracity,’ ‘reliability,’ and ‘basis of knowledge’ are all highly relevant in determining the value of [an informant’s] report,” these elements “should [not] be understood as entirely separate and independent requirements to be rigidly exacted in every case.” Id.
In this instance, the Cl was not a model citizen—he sported a criminal record and unresolved state criminal charges were looming. The defendant asserts that the police knew little or nothing more about the Cl. He adds that, although no money had been offered or explicit promises made, the Cl obviously expected a good reference from the officers to the local district attorney as a quid pro quo for the tip.
This assertion understates what the police knew and when they knew it. For one thing, the Cl was not anonymous. Since he was known to the police, he could have been held accountable if his information proved inaccurate or false. Cf. Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 146-47, 92 S.Ct. 1921, 32 L.Ed.2d 612 (1972) (suggesting that informant’s reliability was buttressed by the fact that he risked prosecution should he make a false report). For another thing, at the time of the tip that prompted the arrest, the Cl had been cooperating with the authorities for approximately one month. During that period, Cashman had several interactions with him. Moreover, even prior to July 7, the Cl had provided trustworthy information and had demonstrated his knowledge of the drug trade in the Portland area. Thus, by July 29 the Cl had compiled some record of reliability.
To be sure, factors like an informant’s prior criminal record and desire to advantage himself with respect to pending-criminal charges are to be considered in evaluating his reliability. But such considerations are not dispositive. The fact of the matter is that those who possess information about the inner workings of the drug trade are unlikely to be persons of impeccable moral integrity. While the source’s general credibility must be considered, all that the law requires is that, when all the pertinent considerations are weighed, the information reasonably appears to be rehable. See Gates, 462 U.S. at 230, 103 S.Ct. 2317.
There is no point in beating a dead horse. In this case, the character, quality, and subsequent corroboration of the tip made it sufficiently reliable to provide a “specific and articulable” predicate for the investigatory stop. Terry, 392 U.S. at 21, 88 S.Ct. 1868.
Central to this conclusion is the fact that the Cl provided a plethora of details about the alleged drug trafficker’s modus oper-andi—and a tip that describes the criminal activity in detail is more likely to be reliable. See Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410, 416, 89 S.Ct. 584, 21 L.Ed.2d 637 (1969); cf. United States v. Barnard, 299 F.3d 90, 93 (1st Cir.2002) (“The credibility of an informant is enhanced to the extent he has provided information that indicates first-hand knowledge.”).
To illustrate, the Cl specified the type and quantity of the drugs in transit, the transporter’s method of travel, what bus line he would patronize, and the name of one of his confederates (Peter Tanguay). He also specified the date, time, and place of the suspect’s arrival in Portland, the identity of the person who would meet him there, the exact vehicle that would be deployed, and the suspect’s intended destination. In short, the tip was sufficiently laden with details to demonstrate that the Cl had inside knowledge of the events that he was describing.
The defendant’s attack on this panoply of facts is impuissant. As framed, that attack places undue emphasis on the Cl’s inability to provide a detailed physical description of the alleged drug trafficker. Although vague or ubiquitous descriptions may raise Fourth Amendment concerns, see, e.g., United States v. Hudson, 405 F.3d 425, 438-39 (6th Cir.2005), everything depends on context.
In this instance, we believe that the Cl’s description, viewed in light of the totality of the circumstances, was constitutionally sufficient to justify reasonable suspicion. Even though he did not recount the precise physical characteristics of the alleged drug trafficker, he specified the suspect’s race—a datum that the police regularly use to facilitate identification, see 4 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure, A Treatise on the Fourth Amendment § 9.5(g), at 555-56 n. 376 (4th ed.2004)—and he supplied pertinent details about the suspect’s whereabouts, associates, activities, and destination. As a result, the police were not simply looking for a black man; they were looking for a black man getting off the afternoon bus from New York City on July 29, at the Vermont Transit bus terminal in Portland, carrying illegal drugs, and being met by Peter Tanguay in the Cl’s green pick-up truck. We find that description constitutionally sufficient.
The defendant’s asseveration that the police failed adequately to corroborate the tip is equally unavailing. The record, fairly read, suggests the opposite. In terms of corroboration, the authorities need not totally eliminate the risk that an informant is providing erroneous information. That would be an unrealistically heavy burden, and the law doe

[truncated for spike corpus]