Case: Foster-Miller, Inc. v. Babcock & Wilcox Canada
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Date: 2000-03-31
Citation: 210 F.3d 1
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11525983

STAHL, Circuit Judge.
At the conclusion of a nine-day trial, a jury determined that defendant Babcock & Wilcox Canada (BWC) had breached a confidentiality and non-disclosure agreement that it had reached with a competitor, plaintiff Foster-Miller, Inc. (FMI). The breach sued upon was BWC’s alleged use of confidential FMI technology in the development of a small diameter, high pressure, flexible hose. The jury set FMI’s damages at $5,084,587. BWC appeals from an interlocutory order denying one of its discovery motions, the judgment entered pursuant to the jury’s verdict, and the judgment entered pursuant to a memorandum and order denying its post-verdict motion for judgment as a matter of law. BWC’s principal claim is one of evidentiary insufficiency. FMI cross-appeals from orders sanctioning it for a discovery abuse and denying its motion for a partial new trial on damages. We affirm in all respects.
I.
This case already has been the subject of three published opinions. See 46 F.3d 138 (1st Cir.1995) (vacating and remanding 848 F.Supp. 271 (D.Mass.1994)); 975 F.Supp. 30 (D.Mass.1997). We therefore eschew a comprehensive recitation of the litigation and confine our present focus to matters relevant to these appeals. In doing so, we sometimes defer more detañed descriptions of pertinent events to our discussions of the specific arguments advanced. And as in any case that challenges the sufficiency of the evidence, we present the historical facts as the jury might have found them, consistent with the record but in a light most favorable to the verdict. See, e.g., Grajales-Romero v. American Airlines Inc., 194 F.3d 288, 292 (1st Cir.1999).
In the. 1980s, both FMI and BWC became involved in the business of cleaning nuclear powered steam generators. Impurities in the water boiled off in a nuclear generator leave on the generator’s bundled tubes an often extremely hard sediment called “sludge.” Over time, sludge deposits corrode and wear away the tubes. Sludge-generated corrosion is a major problem in nuclear generators. If unchecked, it can lead to radioactive leaks and astronomically expensive plant shutdowns needed to effectuate repairs. '
In the 1980s, FMI and BWC were the only two companies engaged in the business of “sludge lancing.” Sludge lancing flushes away accumulated sludge on a generator’s tubes with a thin stream of pressurized water delivered through a high pressure hose encased within a metal water lance. By the late 1980s, BWC had developed a manual sludge lancing system for cleaning the nuclear generators of Ontario Hydro, a Canadian public utility. The relationship between BWC and Ontario Hydro was longstanding; BWC had designed Ontario Hydro’s generators. But because the water lance and stainless steel reinforced hose in BWC’s system were insufficiently flexible to maneuver into more than half of the many nooks and crannies between and among the tube bundles in Ontario Hydro’s generators, the tubes — which are significantly closer together in Canadian generators than in the typical United States commercial generator — were caked with a disconcerting amount of unreachable sludge.
In contrast, by the late 1980s, FMI had developed a robotically controlled “flex-lance” sludge removal system. As initially designed, FMI’s lance contained a stainless steel braided hose flexible enough to bend 90 degrees. This flexibility permitted the lance to enter the relatively wide gaps between and among the tubes in United States commercial generators for purposes of sludge removal. In 1988, FMI began research into adapting its flexlance system for use on the steam generators used in United States Navy nuclear powered vessels. The adaptation process was not straightforward because, like the Canadian generators, the naval generators had significantly smaller inter-tube gaps than United States commercial generators, and the lance and hose developed for use in the commercial generators would not fit into these narrower spaces. Thus, in August 1988, FMI began research into one of the central problems of the adaption process and the problem at the heart of this lawsuit: acquiring or developing a hose small enough (.125 inch outer diameter) to maneuver into the tube gaps in the naval generators, strong enough to withstand the very high burst pressures (10,000 pounds per square inch) needed for effective sludge removal, and yet flexible enough to bend up to 90 degrees.
Initially, FMI retained an outside consultant, Philip Lichtman, to look into whether such a hose might be available from a commercial hose vendor. Licht-man did not testify at trial, but notes he made in connection with his hose search (which were admitted into evidence over BWC’s objection) suggested that his search was unsuccessful. The following is an excerpt from the so-called Lichtman notes that is particularly important to this appeal:
Time after time, other vendors refer to Rogan & Shanley as the prime source for small-diameter high pressure hose. I spoke with Dr. Rogan twice.... [T]here are technical problems which Rogan feels may be virtually insuperable at almost any price. In short, Rogan thinks [FMI] is wasting [its] time; that only [insufficiently flexible] metal tube will do the job.
In other sections, the Lichtman notes indicate that a second vendor also had described the project as “insuperable,” and that a third vendor had thought developing such a small, strong, and flexible hose would be “very difficult.”
In September 1988, an FMI engineer named Chip Babbitt conducted a second commercial hose search. Babbitt used Liehtman’s notes as a starting point and followed up with several of the vendors Lichtman previously had contacted. Like Lichtman, Babbitt had no luck finding a commercial hose suitable for the naval application. He then mentioned his problem to another FMI engineer, Jay Boyce. Boyce suggested that a hose with a Kevlar braid reinforcement be used. Kevlar is a strong and flexible fiber, but it is highly susceptible to fraying. Boyce also suggested that Babbitt discuss his problem with Glenn Freitas, an FMI engineer who had experience with fiber braiding. Frei-tas concurred in Boyce’s Kevlar suggestion and further recommended that the braided Kevlar be coated with an elastomeric matrix (i.e., a flexible coating typically made from rubber or plastic) to protect the Kevlar from abrasion.
Subsequently, Babbitt began to look for a company that could manufacture a hose of the size and strength needed for the Navy project. In the fall of 1988, Babbitt wrote to a number of hose manufacturers. In his letters, he set forth the size, flexibility, and pressure requirements of the contemplated hose. Although the letters explicitly mentioned the possibility of using stainless steel to reinforce the hose (the approach advocated by many of the manufacturers Babbitt had contacted during his hose search), the letters also suggested that the hose might be constructed with a flexible nylon core, reinforced with a Kevlar overbraid, and coated with a flexible elastomeric matrix “such as a urethane.” One of the companies Babbitt contacted at this time was U.S. Composites, a braiding company that had not previously been involved in designing or manufacturing hoses.
In December 1988, FMI commissioned U.S. Composites and another manufacturer to create some Kevlar hose samples in the event a suitable stainless steel reinforced hose could not be designed. In January 1989, U.S. Composites shipped FMI a set of uncoated Kevlar-braided hose samples, which FMI found to be “among the most promising” of the hose prototypes then available. In February 1989, Daniel Fischbach, another FMI engineer, replaced Babbitt on the hose development project. The following month, although FMI was still experimenting with a stainless steel reinforced hose, FMI and U.S. Composites entered into a contract under which U.S. Composites would continue to manufacture and supply to FMI hose samples with Kevlar overbraids. This contract, along with two other FMI/U.S. Composites contracts covering the emerging naval hose technology, contained a confidentiality agreement designed to protect the emerging technology.
In the spring and summer of 1989, FMI tested a number of Kevlar-wrapped hose samples and experienced problems with bursting. Throughout this time, FMI was still contemplating whether to protect the Kevlar by coating it with a matrix such as urethane or by surrounding it with a separate outside cover. By fall, FMI was leaning towards a coated, coverless hose and had U.S. Composites experimentally coat its samples with various types of urethanes and epoxies. By December 1989, U.S. Composites had generated samples of hose using a number of different coating materials. Eventually, FMI chose for the Navy project a hose with a nylon core, a single layer of Kevlar braid, and a urethane coating.
Meanwhile, back in 1988, after FMI had begun work on the naval project, Ontario Hydro approached FMI about the possibility of applying its flexlance technology to clean the tube bundles within its generators. Shortly thereafter, William Schneider of BWC called FMI and proposed that the two competitors cooperate, as each of the companies had information and technology that might prove useful in solving Ontario Hydro’s sludge problem. Eventually, the companies submitted to Ontario Hydro separate proposals for jointly studying and addressing the problem. The companies did not share their proposals with each other, as each proposal contained confidential information. FMI subsequently entered into a separate agreement with Ontario Hydro to study the feasibility of using the flexlance system in Canadian generators.
In January 1990, FMI assigned William Leary, an engineer who had assisted in the completion of the Navy project, the task of obtaining a flexible hose for a lance to be used in the Canadian generators. The hose could be slightly larger (.200 inch outer diameter) than the Navy hose, but it required a greater pressure retention capacity. Like Lichtman and Babbitt, Leary first attempted to find a suitable commercial hose. Using Lichtman’s and Babbitt’s search notes as his starting point, Leary contacted twenty-five different manufacturers. His search was unsuccessful. Leary thus turned 'to the naval project engineers and asked how the Navy hose might be adapted to the Canadian application. The engineers agreed that wrapping a second layer of Kevlar around the hose might do the trick. Subsequently, FMI contacted U.S. Composites and asked it to create a hose similar to the Navy hose but with a double wrap of Kevlar. In early April 1990, U.S. Composites shipped samples of the requested hose to FMI.
Leary’s hose work proceeded as FMI was preparing its feasibility study for Ontario Hydro. On May 11, 1990, an Ontario Hydro representative agreed to travel to FMI’s research and development facility in Waltham, Massachusetts, for a meeting to discuss the progress of the study. Ontario Hydro requested that a BWC engineer, Daniel St. Louis, also attend the meeting. St. Louis understood that he had been invited to provide input with respect to certain water lancing tests necessary to completion of the study. FMI agreed to St. Louis’ presence but required BWC to execute a confidentiality agreement to protect confidential information that would be discussed at the meeting. In relevant part, the agreement provided that, for a period of five years, BWC would not “use FMI’s [confidential, proprietary or novel information] for any purpose unless specifically authorized in writing by FMI.” The agreement also explicitly excluded from the definition of “confidential, proprietary or novel information” that which, “in its disclosed combination^], is in the public domain through no fault of [BWC].”
The meeting lasted the better part of the day, and St. Louis was excluded from a number of discussions involving sensitive FMI technology and information. But in a brief presentation towards the end of the meeting, Leary showed St. Louis a sample of the hose FMI was developing for the Canadian application. Leary told St. Louis that the hose had a nylon core, Kevlar-wrap, and urethane coating. Leary also informed St. Louis that U.S. Composites was manufacturing the hose for FMI. Unbeknownst to Leary and FMI, St. Louis was at the time spearheading an effort by BWC to develop a 90-degree flexible lance of its own. At some point after the meeting, St. Louis called Leary and obtained from him the address of U.S. Composites.
Thereafter, St. Louis contacted U.S. Composites and spoke with its president, Hugo Kruesi. St. Louis asked Kruesi if U.S. Composites could make for BWC “a similar hose to that ... provided for [FMI].” In the course of several subsequent telephone conversations between Kruesi and St. Louis, Kruesi provided St. Louis with two price quotations and detailed information regarding the FMI hose’s construction. St. Louis also obtained from U.S. Composites a sample of FMI’s hose, which he subjected to analysis and testing. By the fall of 1990, however, Kruesi had become concerned that his interactions with BWC were violative of the confidentiality agreements between FMI and U.S. Composites. He thus telephoned FMI and asked whether there would be a problem if U.S. Composites were to produce a high pressure flexible hose for BWC. FMI asked Kruesi to hold off on manufacturing anything for BWC. Subsequently, BWC asked FMI for permission to develop a high pressure flexible hose through U.S. Composites, but FMI declined to grant such permission.
In March 1990, two months prior to the May 11 meeting at FMI, BWC had still been proposing sludge removal with the relatively inflexible stainless steel technology it had been using for years. It was not until April 1990, when Ontario Hydro suggested to it the need for a more flexible lance, that BWC even began to contemplate designing its own product capable of bending up to 90 degrees. And it was not until after the May 11 meeting, during the period of time that St. Louis initiated contacts with U.S. Composites, that BWC documented any research into the development of such a product.
On June 20, 1990, BWC made its first proposal to Ontario Hydro to develop a water lance of sufficient size and strength to meet Ontario Hydro’s sludge lancing needs yet capable of bending up to 90 degrees. The proposal specifically disclaimed any guarantee of success “in view of the developmental nature of the work.” At some point in the months that followed, BWC performed its own unsuccessful search for a commercial hose suitable for use in Canadian generators. During this same period of time, St. Louis also subjected the FMI hose sample to destructive testing. The FMI hose was the oniy sample St. Louis ever tested. By November 1990, BWC's flexible lance was complete "except for the tubing."
Meanwhile, at some point after its efforts to work with U.S. Composites had fallen through, BWC contracted with a Canadian company known as Barrday to manufacture its hose. As initially designed, the BWC hose, like the FMI hose, had a nylon core reinforced with a sheathing of urethane-coated and braided Keviar. But it was different in many respects. Unlike the FMI hose, the BWC hose was not "wet braided"; it instead was pulled through a bucket of urethane (of a different type than that used by FMI) after the Keviar had already been braided upon the hose. Moreover, the BWC hose had an outer abrasion cover. Finally, the BWC hose used thicker strands of Keviar weaved onto the core tube at a somewhat different angle than that employed by FMI.
During the life of the FMI/BWC confidentiality agreement, Ontario Hydro sought bids on sixteen jobs requiring the contractor to perform sludge removal with a water lance flexible enough to bend 90 degrees. FMI successfully bid on one of these jobs; BWC won the other fifteen. At trial, FMI took the position that, but for BWC's wrongful use of confidential informa

[truncated for spike corpus]