Case: Brinkley v. Harbour Recreation Club
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Date: 1999-06-14
Citation: 180 F.3d 598
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11664528

Affirmed by published opinion. Judge WILLIAMS wrote the majority opinion, in which Chief Judge WILKINSON joined. Judge MOTZ wrote a dissenting opinion.
OPINION
WILLIAMS, Circuit Judge:
Elizabeth Brinkley appeals the grant of summary judgment in favor of her former employer, Harbour Recreation Club (HRC), on her Title VII, 42 U.S.C.A. §. 2000e-2(a)(l) (West 1994), and Equal Pay Act, 29 U.S.C.A. § 206(d) (West 1998), claims. Brinkley, who was general manager (GM) of HRC, argues that she created a genuine issue of material fact on her Title VII claim when she put forth evidence that demonstrated that some of her superiors on the HRC Board of Trustees (Board) favored her termination because they lamented the loss of a particular greens superintendent who had publicly stated that he - was not pleased to work for a woman. Brinkley also • asserts that the district court made two errors in addressing her Equal Pay Act claim. First, she alleges that the district court based its summary judgment ruling on an affirmative defense that was improperly raised. Second, she contends that the district court erred when it granted summary judgment to HRC on the basis that HRC had established the “faetor-other-than-sex” defense, 29 U.S.C.A. § 206(d)(l)(iv), because HRC had produced insufficient evidence that such a factor motivated HRC’s decision to pay her male successor a higher salary. Because we determine that summary judgment was appropriate, we affirm.
I.
These facts, drawn from Brinkley’s pleadings, affidavits, and depositions, are expressed in the light most favorable to her as the non-moving party. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986) (stating that an appellate court reviewing a grant of summary judgment is required to view the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and must draw all reasonable inferences there-' from).
In October 1993, a group of homeowners in the Fairfield Harbour development in New Bern, North Carolina, having purchased their residential community’s country club during Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings, organized HRC as a member-owned club. The officers of the HRC Board hired Brinkley to be the club’s business manager on October '7, 1993. Brinkley possessed a bachelor’s degree in business administration from Ithaca College, but at the time she took the position as HRC’s business manager, she had no previous country club experience. Brinkley received a starting salary of $30,000. Her duties as business manager included: setting up and supervising the business office; organizing and maintaining membership records; coordinating insurance coverages; implementing contracts; maintaining corporate documents such as bylaws; assisting the Board in establishing budgets; supervising accounting, record-keeping, and reporting procedures; communicating with members; and selecting and maintaining a computerized point-of-sale system.
In January 1995, after a vote by the HRC Board, Brinkley was promoted to the position of GM of HRC. Shortly before they voted. on promoting Brinkley, members of the Board discussed during a meeting with the club staff the possibility of promoting Brinkley to GM. Board members asked the staff whether anyone would have difficulty working with Brinkley in that capacity. One staff member, Dick Brandel, the greens superintendent, stated that he wasn’t sure he could work for a woman.
HRC and Brinkley entered into an employment contract prepared by Brinkley on February 16, 1995. The initial term of the contract was three years and. provided that her starting salary was $50,000. Brinkley was eligible for cost-of-living increases as well as merit raises over the term of the contract. Further, the contract provided that a two-thirds majority of the Board could vote to terminate Brinkley without cause. In the event of such an occurrence, the Board would be obligated to pay Brinkley for the remainder of the contract term. If, however, a two-thirds majority of the Board determined that Brinkley was guilty of fraud and abuse in the performance of her duties or of gross negligence, the employment contract could be terminated immediately.
At the end of Brinkley’s first year as GM, the club had lost $166,111. At the same time, the Board became, concerned about the poor working relationship that had developed between Brinkley and Brandel, the greens superintendent. Brinkley and Brandel became embroiled in a dispute regarding expenses Brandel had incurred. Brinkley concluded that Bran-del had incurred unauthorized personal expenses and requested that he reimburse HRC. Brandel refused to reimburse HRC; Brinkley considered the refusal to be an act of insubordination and requested that the Board support Brandel’s termination. A majority of the Board did not support Brandéis termination. Instead, the Board altered the reporting relationship between Brandel and Brinkley. After the Board’s vote, Brinkley and Brandel were instructed that henceforth Brandel was to report to the golf pro rather than to Brinkley. Additional concerns over her job performance arose among members of the Board when Brinkley led a membership forum meeting in February 1996 during which the Board members concluded that Brinkley had made inappropriate comments about HRC’s management and her relationship with the Board.
Dick Brandel eventually resigned from HRC in May of 1996. Later, Brinkley was informed that “you did not win with Dick Brandel leaving.” (J.A. at 393.) Also in May, a Board member circulated a memorandum proposing that golf operations be made a separate autonomous operation headed by the director of golf and suggesting that Brinkley be demoted back to the position of business manager. Although this plan was never formally implemented, on June 5, 1996, Brinkley was instructed “not to micro manage golf.” (J.A. at 393-94). A few days later, during a discussion with the golf pro, Brinkley expressed her anger with the fact that the golf pro had been communicating directly with the Board. Brinkley complained that this behavior was undermining her authority as GM. At the conclusion of their meeting Brinkley said, “If this [is] the way you’re going to do it, you can sink or swim on your own.” (J.A. at 37.)
On June 11,1996, the Board had a meeting with the golf pro. After the meeting, representatives of the Board approached Brinkley and told her that they would have to abide by her decision to relinquish management of the golf operation on a temporary basis, but that the Board wanted a cohesive management team and was disturbed by the division of management. After considering their options, the Board informed Brinkley that her employment contract for the GM position would not be renewed as a result of her decision to give up managing HRC’s golf operation. On July 9, 1996, the Board proposed that Brinkley continue at HRC as restaurant manager. On July 11, 1996, Brinkley informed that Board that she would not accept the position of restaurant manager.
Nevertheless, the Board decided to hire' someone new to take over management of HRC. After an interview on July 13,1996, James Paschal, who had eleven years of country club management experience, was hired to take on the position of chief operating officer (COO) on a'temporary, ninety-day basis while the Board decided how to proceed. On July 19, 1996, Paschal signed a ninety-day contract providing that his salary would be $1,200 per week plus free meal privileges. This salary represented a mutually agreeable temporary arrangement based upon what the Board felt it could afford.
Prior to the termination of his ninety-day contract, the Board decided to hire Paschal as the permanent COO. On September 1, 1996, Paschal and HRC entered into a contract that provided for a salary of $75,400 per year. Under the contract, Paschal’s free meal privileges continued. Additionally, the contract provided that Paschal would be compensated in the amount of $300 per month as an automobile allowance. The Board determined that $75,400 would be an appropriate salary on the basis of Paschal’s prior salary history and information it sought from the Country Club Managers Association regarding the average salary figures at similar-sized clubs. At about the same time, on August 30, 1996, Brinkley took three weeks of vacation at the direction of Paschal. Upon her return, on September 23, 1996, the Board terminated Brinkley’s employment contract for cause. The Board determined by a unanimous vote that Brinkley had been grossly negligent in the performance of her duties. Specifically, the Board noted that Brinkley unilaterally had terminated her management of the golf 'Operation, had exercised poor judgment handling two problematic contracts, had failed to consult with the Board over personnel matters, had promoted an unqualified employee to the position of restaurant manager, had given misinformation regarding a capital equipment purchase', and had publicly aired her opinion that she did not agree with Board policy to HRC members.
II.
As a result of the foregoing events, Brinkley filed a written charge with the EEOC claiming that she had been demoted, terminated, and otherwise discriminated against on the basis of sex. After receiving a right-to-sue letter, Brinkley filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina. In her complaint, Brinkley made three claims for relief. First, Brinkley claimed that her termination from HRC was the, result of discrimination on the basis of sex, a violation of Title VII. 42 U.S.C.A. § 2000e — 2(a)(1) (West 1994). In her second claim, Brinkley alleged that HRC hired a male, as COO to perform identical duties to those that she had performed as GM and paid him a, higher salary in violation of the Equal Pay Act. 29 U.S.C.A. § 206(d) (West 1998). Finally, Brinkley averred that her termination was a result of HRC’s breach of her employment contract.
After undertaking discovery, the parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. The district court denied Brinkley’s motion for summary judgment and granted HRC’s. As a result, the district court also dismissed without prejudice the breach of contract claim over which it had taken supplemental jurisdiction. In granting HRC’s summary judgment motion, the district court reasoned that Brinkley had failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination under Title VII. Specifically, the district court held that Brinkley had not met her burden of proving that she was replaced by a man with comparable qualifications because HRC had established that Paschal had significant prior experience in .country club management lacked by Brinkley. Additionally, the district court concluded that Brinkley had not been performing her job as GM at a level that met the Board’s expectations. The district court also concluded that summary judgment was appropriate on Brinkley’s Equal Pay Act claim because HRC had proven an affirmative defense under the Act, ie., that the pay differential was based upon a “factor other than sex.” Specifically, the district court determined that HRC had presented adequate evidence to show that Paschal’s superior experience and salary history, neither a factor related to sex, accounted for the pay differential between Brinkley and Paschal. Brinkley filed a timely notice of appeal.
On appeal, Brinkley makes three primary arguments. First, Brinkley asserts that the district court erred when it concluded that she had not made out a prima facie case on her Title VII claim. Next, she claims that the district court erred when it considered HRC’s affirmative defense — that the pay differential between Paschal and Brinkley was based upon a “factor other than sex” — because that affirmative defense was not properly raised in HRC’s answer, but rather was first raised in HRC’s summary judgment motion in violation of Rule.8 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. In the alternative, Brinkley maintains that the district court erred in granting summary judgment to HRC on the Equal Pay Act claim because, even if the affirmative defense was properly raised, the evidence put forth by HRC was insufficient to establish the defense by a preponderance of the evidence.
We review de novo the district court’s decision to grant HRC summary judgment. See Higgins v. E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co., 863 F.2d 1162, 1167 (4th Cir.1988). Summary judgment is appropriate only “if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact.” Fed.R.Civ.P. 56; Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 (1986). In deciding whether there is a genuine issue of material fact, the evidence of the non-moving party' is to be believed and all justifiable inferences must be drawn in her favor. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986). Guided by these principles, we address Brinkley’s arguments that summary judgment was improper se-riatim.
III.
Brinkley first contends that the district court erred when it granted summary judgment on her Title VII claim. Brinkley’s claim in this regard is two-fold. First, she asserts that the district court erred because she had produced sufficient direct and indirect evidence that discrimination led to her demotion and eventual termination from the GM position to establish a prima facie case without applying the McDonnell Douglas presumption. Second, Brinkley asserts that even if she had not produced sufficient direct and indirect evidence of discrimination, then she produced circumstantial evidence sufficient to satisfy the McDonnell Douglas proof scheme. See McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973). Upon those two bases, Brinkley argues that the district court erred in ruling that she had not established a prima facie case.
A.
There are two avenues of proof by which an aggrieved employee can prove a Title VII violation. See Burns v. AAF-McQuay, Inc., 96 F.3d 728, 731 (4th Cir.1996). First, an employee may utilize “ordinary principles of proof using any direct or indirect evidence relevant to and sufficiently probative of the issue.” Tuck v. Henkel Corp., 973 F.2d 371, 374 (4th Cir.1992). To overcome a summary judgment motion based upon this method of proof, the plaintiff “must produce direct evidence of a stated purpose to discriminate and/or [indirect] evidence of sufficient probative force to reflect a genuine issue of material fact.” Goldberg v. B. Green & Co., Inc., 836 F.2d 845, 848 (4th Cir.1988). “What is required is evidence of conduct or statements that both reflect directly the alleged discriminatory attitude and that bear directly on the contested employment decision.” Fuller v. Phipps, 67 F.3d 1137, 1142 (4th Cir.1995). If such evidence is lacking, the plaintiff may nevertheless proceed under McDonnell Douglas. See Tuck, 973 F.2d at 374.
McDonnell Douglas first requires that the plaintiff establish a prima facie case of discrimination by a preponderance of the evidence. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, 93 S.Ct. 1817. To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under Title VII, Brinkley must show (1) that she is a member of a protected class; (2) that she suffered an adverse employment action; (3) that at the time of the adverse employment action she was performing at a level that met her employer’s legitimate job expectations; and (4) that the position remained open to or was filled by similarly qualified applicants outside the protected class. See St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 506-07, 113 S.Ct. 2742, 125 L.Ed.2d 407 (1993); Karpel v. Inova Health Sys. Servs., 134 F.3d 1222, 1228 (4th Cir.1998); Williams v. Cerberonics, Inc., 871 F.2d 452, 455 (4th Cir.1989). Once the prima facie case is estabhshed, the burden shifts to the employe

[truncated for spike corpus]