Case: Banks v. Travelers Companies
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
Date: 1999-05-12
Citation: 180 F.3d 358
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11663060

JOSÉ A. CABRANES, Circuit Judge:
Elizabeth E. Banks appeals from a May 5, 1998 judgment of United States District Court for the District of Connecticut (Ellen Bree Burns, Judge), entered following a jury verdict in Banks’s favor. The jury found defendant The Travelers Companies (“Travelers”) liable under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (the “ADEA”), 29 U.S.C. §§ 621 et seq., for discharging Banks in January 1994 on account of age, and awarded her $77,127 in damages. Banks principally argues on appeal (No. 98-7776) that the district court erred in concluding, as a matter of law, that she was ineligible for damages for the period after April 1, 1996, when the department in which Banks had worked underwent a reduction in force. The district court ruled that whether Banks would have survived this reduction in force was pure speculation. Accordingly, the court (1) instructed the jury not to award Banks any back pay for the period between April 1, 1996 and the entry of judgment, and (2) declined to award Banks either reinstatement or post-judgment damages known as “front pay.” In addition, Banks argues that the district court erred in its denial of her post-verdict application for an injunction directing defendant to “restore” Banks’s lost pension credits.
In its cross-appeal (No. 98-7804), Travelers argues that the district court erred in (1) refusing to instruct the jury that because Banks was hired and fired by the “same actor,” the jury was entitled to infer that the decision to discharge Banks was not motivated by age, and (2) denying Travelers’ motion for judgment as a matter of law, pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P. 50.
We conclude that the evidence presented at trial would have permitted a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that Banks would have been retained following the April 1996 reduction in force had she not been discriminatorily discharged in January 1994. In addition, we conclude that the district court erred in its reason for denying Banks’s post-verdict application for “restoration” of her pension credits. Accordingly, we vacate the judgment of the district court insofar as it incorporates the award of damages and the denial of reinstatement, front pay, and pension credits and remand to the district court for further proceedings, including a new trial limited to damages. We affirm, however, with respect to Travelers’ cross-appeal.
Background
Banks worked for Travelers from July 1986 until her discharge in January 1994. At the time she was discharged, Banks was 49 years old and served as a Senior Communications Consultant in defendant’s Loss Prevention and Engineering Division (“LP & E Division”). After Banks’s employment was terminated, her duties were assumed by Cindy Dvorachek, who was then 27 years old.
Banks filed the instant action in March 1995, asserting that she had been discharged on account of her age, in violation of the ADEA. The evidence presented at trial which we are required to view in the light most favorable to plaintiff, who obtained a favorable jury verdict, see Marchica v. Long Island R.R. Co., 31 F.3d 1197, 1200 (2d Cir.1994) would have permitted the jury to find the following facts:
Prior to her employment at Travelers, Banks obtained a bachelor’s degree in English, a master’s degree in education, and a certificate in technical writing and corporate publications, and worked as an English teacher and as a computer marketing representative. She was hired by Travelers in 1986, and began work as a Technical Writer in Travelers’ Information Systems Division. In April 1988, she accepted a transfer and apparently a promotion to the position of Senior Technical Writer in the LP & E Division. She was interviewed for that position both by Beth Haluszka, the supervisor of the LP & E Communications Unit, and by Haluszka’s superior, Halbert M. Dufault, Haluszka met with Banks to extend the offer, but Dufault testified that only he had the authority to hire Banks, and that he had made the ultimate decision.
In April 1989 approximately one year after Banks transferred to the LP & E Division she was joined by Dvorachek, a recent college graduate who was hired to work as an Assistant Technical Writer. Shortly after Dvorachek was hired, it appears that Banks’s title was changed from Senior Technical Writer to Senior Communications Consultant, and Dvorachek’s from Assistant Technical Writer to Communications Consultant; there is no indication in the record, however, that either redesignation was associated with a promotion. In April 1993, Dvorachek was promoted to Senior Communications Consultant, the same job title then held by Banks.
By 1993, Banks and Dvorachek were the only two remaining employees in the Communications Unit of the LP & E Division. Late in that year, Dufault was asked by his superior to look for positions in the Division that could be eliminated in order to cut costs. In addition, an internal report had suggested the need to name a person to the position of Communications Manager; that person would coordinate communications between the main LP & E office and employees working in the field. Dufault testified that he decided that both Senior Communications Consultant positions should be eliminated, and that either Banks or Dvorachek should be named to a newly created position of Communications Manager.
Dufault, in collaboration with employee relations specialist Stephanie Grabowski, purported to follow a methodical process of meetings and evaluations, which the parties refer to as a “staff adjustment” process, in deciding between the two candidates. There was evidence in the record, however, from which the jurors could have inferred that Dvorachek had actually been preselected over Banks, and that the evaluations were conducted merely to create the illusion that Banks was given equivalent consideration. In particular, although the record suggests that the “staff adjustment” process was completed at some time between late December 1993 and early January 1994, the LP & E budgetary documents for December 1993 already omitted Banks’s name from the list of employees. And in October 1993 the month before Dufault and Grabowski commenced the “staff adjustment” process Du-fault fixed the salary increases for 1994, granting Dvorachek an 11.4% increase but leaving Banks’s salary unchanged. In addition, the jury could have reasonably concluded from Banks’s more extensive work experience and seniority, as well as from an earlier performance evaluation, that she was the better qualified candidate.
In any event, Banks was informed on January 10, 1994 that she was discharged, effective January 21, 1994. Thereafter, Dvorachek was named to the remaining position.
Dvorachek continued to occupy this position until April 1996, when Travelers purchased a portion of the insurance business of Aetna Life and Casualty Company. At that time, Travelers consolidated the communications functions formerly performed by Travelers and by the acquired business into a single unit, thereby reducing the number of communications positions from 26 to 13. Dvorachek was among the 13 competitors who were retained in the newly centralized unit. Dvorachek testified that her new job title was Senior Communications Advisor, and that she was now paid at a salary grade of 66, which was two levels higher than her grade as Communications Manager.
Based on the evidence presented at trial, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Banks and awarded her $77,127 in damages. After ruling on various post-verdict motions, which are discussed below to the extent relevant to our review, the court entered judgment. Banks filed a timely appeal, and Travelers countered with a timely cross-appeal.
Discussion
I. Banks’s Appeal
A. Jury Instruction Precluding Post-April 1996 Back Pay
Banks first faults the district court for ruling that the evidence did not permit a reasonable finder of fact to infer that Banks would have been retained following the April 1, 1996 reduction in force. Banks argues that the jury’s verdict in her favor could have permissibly been based on a determination that Banks was terminated on the basis of age rather than on the basis of Dvorachek’s superior qualifications. Banks further argues that if the jury concluded that Dvorachek’s skills were not superior to Banks’s, then it would be entitled to infer that Banks would have survived any reduction in force that had not resulted in Dvorachek’s termination. The district court ruled that any such inference would be “entirely too speculative,” and thus instructed the jury that it could not award back pay for the period after the April 1, 1996 reduction in force.
We agree with Banks that such an inference was permissible. We considered a similar argument in Paolitto v. John Brown E. & C., Inc., 151 F.3d 60 (2d Cir.1998) an appeal decided after judgment had already entered in the instant case. In Paolitto, the plaintiff prevailed on a claim that his employer had violated the ADEA by promoting a younger worker instead of the plaintiff in 1987. Because the plaintiff had been terminated on con-cededly nondiscriminatory grounds in 1993, however, the district court refused to award post-termination relief. On appeal, we “agree[d] with Paolitto that, under the circumstances in particular the fact that [the younger employee promoted in 1987] was not terminated as part of the company-wide layoff in 1993 [plaintiff] need not have alleged that his termination in 1993 was discriminatory in order to recover post-termination relief.” Id. at 68. Like the plaintiff in Paolitto, Banks was entitled to argue that, but for the earlier act of discrimination, she would have been retained amid the employer’s subsequent layoffs. A jury would be permitted but not necessarily required to accept that inference.
Travelers draws to our attention record evidence indicating that Dvorachek was not merely retained in April 1996, but received a promotion as a result of the competitive process for the positions remaining after the April 1996 reduction in force. While the evidence does show that Dvorachek herself received a pay-grade promotion, the record is silent as to whether the only remaining positions were for that higher pay grade. Travelers may argue to the jury that Banks would not have been retained in April 1996 for exam-pie, because her skills would not have rendered her as well suited as Dvorachek to fill any of the remaining positions. But we do not see the evidence in this ease commanding such an inference in Travelers’ favor.
Accordingly, we hold that the district court erred in instructing the jury that it could not award damages for the period from April 1, 1996 to the date of the verdict, and we remand the cause for a new trial, limited only to damages, see, e.g., Annis v. County of Westchester, 136 F.3d 239, 249 (2d Cir.1998) (affirming as to liability, but vacating damages award and remanding for new trial as to damages), in which the parties will be entitled to present to the jury, inter alia, their respective arguments relating to post-April 1996 back pay.
We have held that “[a] plaintiff who has proven a discharge in violation of the ADEA is, as a general matter, entitled to backpay from the date of discharge until the date of judgment.” Kirsch v. Fleet St., Ltd., 148 F.3d 149, 167 (2d Cir.1998) (emphasis added); accord Dunlap-McCuller v. Riese Org., 980 F.2d 153, 159 (2d Cir.1992). In calculating its back pay award, the jury will obviously not be able to anticipate the date on which judgment will enter. Accordingly, any lag time between the jury’s verdict and the district court’s ultimate judgment ordinarily should be remedied by the court, in the form of a pro rata increase of the back pay award. Cf. Nord v. United States Steel Corp., 758 F.2d 1462, 1472-73 (11th Cir.1985) (back pay award should extend to date of judgment, rather than to earlier date on which court announced findings of fact following bench trial).
B. Reinstatement and “Front Pay”
The ADEA confers upon the courts a “broad grant of remedial authority” with which district judges are encouraged to “fashion remedies designed to ensure that victims of age discrimination are made whole.” Whittlesey v. Union Carbide Corp., 742 F.2d 724, 727-28 (2d Cir.1984). Among the forms of equitable relief explicitly authorized by the ADEA is reinstatement of the plaintiffs employment. See 29 U.S.C. § 626(b). We have recognized, however, that reinstatement is not always feasible for instance, because no position may be available or because animosity may impede the resumption of a reasonable employer-employee relationship. See Kirsch, 148 F.3d at 169; Whittlesey, 742 F.2d at 728. In such situations, the district court is empowered to order “a reasonable monetary award of front pay,” Whittlesey, 742 F.2d at 728 that is, an award of “future lost earnings,” United States v. Burke, 504 U.S. 229, 239 n. 9, 112 S.Ct. 1867, 119 L.Ed.2d 34 (1992) (defining “front pay”). In contrast to back pay, which is determined by the jury in calculating the plaintiffs damages, an award of front pay under the ADEA is exclusively within the court’s equitable discretion. See Dominic v. Consolidated Edison Co., 822 F.2d 1249, 1257-58 (2d Cir.1987).
In the instant case, following the jury’s verdict, Banks moved for reinstatement or, in the alternative, for front pay. The district court denied the motion, in respect to both reinstatement and front pay, on the ground that the evidence did not logically allow the inference that plaintiff would have been retained following the April 1996 reduction in force. In addition, the court stated that reinstatement would be inappropriate in light of the animosity that had developed between plaintiff and her employer as a result of this litigation.
Because front pay and reinstatement are forward-looking remedies, they are inappropriate where the employment term would already have ended by the time of judgment. See Kirsch, 148 F.3d at 169; see also Geller v. Markham, 635 F.2d 1027, 1036 (2d Cir.1980) (reinstatement unwarranted where plaintiff had been hired only for a one-year term and that term had expired). However, as discussed in the previous section, the district court erred in concluding that plaintiff had not introduced evidence from which it could be inferred that she would have been retained after April 1996 had she not been discharged discriminatorily in 1994. It follows, therefore, that prospective relief was not precluded altogether.
We remand to the district court for further consideration, in the exercise of its informed equitable discretion, of the prospective remedies of reinstatement and front pay. The parties divide as to whether the court had before it evidence of animosity sufficient to justify the denial of reinstatement. We do not pass upon this issue, but leave it to the district court in the first instance. If there is a lacuna in the record evidence, the parties should be afforded an opportunity to fill it on remand.
C. Pension Credits
Finally, Banks challenges the district court’s denial of her post-verdict motion for the restoration of her lost pension benefits. The district court ruled that what it termed “damages for the loss of pension benefits” amount to legal rather than equitable relief, and must accordingly be awarded by the jury rather than the judge. See generally Dominic, 822 F.2d at 1257 (under the ADEA, the jury finds facts relating to legal claims, whereas the court makes findings relating to equitable claims). Because Banks waited until after the jury’s verdict to request such relief, the court reasoned that her claim was untimely.
Had Banks actually requested money damages for lost pension benefits, the district court might well have been right to deem that form of relief legal, and to rule Banks’s post-verdict application untimely. But it is clear from Banks’s motion as well as her supporting memorandum of law that she sought the “restoration of benefits ... including

[truncated for spike corpus]