Case: Richardson v. New York State Department of Correctional Service
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
Date: 1999-06-16
Citation: 180 F.3d 426
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11663536

Chief Judge WINTER concurs in part and dissents in part in a separate opinion.
MESKILL, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiff-appellant Cynthia A. Richardson (Richardson) appeals from an order of the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York, Scullin, J., granting summary judgment to defendant-appellee the New York State Department of Correctional Service (DOCS). Richardson, an African-American female and former DOCS employee, brought claims under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(l), 3(a), and New York Exec. L. § 290 et seq., alleging that she was subjected to a racially hostile work environment at the DOCS facilities where she worked and that she was retaliated against when she complained about and filed a lawsuit to remedy that discrimination. In granting summary judgment on Richardson’s Title VII hostile environment claim, the district court concluded (1) that Richardson’s allegations, even if true, were as a matter of law insufficient to establish an actionable hostile environment, and (2) that even if the environment in question were sufficiently hostile, no basis existed for imputing that environment to her employer. Richardson v. State of New York, 1997 WL 797527, at *6-6 (N.D.N.Y. Dec. 22, 1997). The district court also granted DOCS summary judgment on Richardson’s Title VII retaliation claim, determining that Richardson failed to present evidence sufficient to establish that DOCS took adverse employment action against her as a result of her having engaged in protected activity. Id. at *7. Finally, the district court granted DOCS’s motion to dismiss Richardson’s state law claims on Eleventh Amendment grounds, over Richardson’s objection that DOCS waived its Eleventh Amendment immunity when it failed to raise the defense in its answer. Id. at *1 n. 1. We affirm the district court’s ruling on Richardson’s state law claims and on two aspects of her Title VII retaliation claims, but we vacate and remand on the Title VII hostile work environment claim and on two aspects of her retaliation claim.
BACKGROUND
Richardson was employed by DOCS from 1988 until 1994 and worked at two separate DOCS facilities during that time period. For the purposes of the summary judgment motion, both DOCS and the district court accepted Richardson’s factual allegations as true. Her allegations concerning each facility are described in turn below.
A. The Auburn Correctional Facility
Richardson was hired by DOCS in December 1988 as a calculations clerk at the Auburn Correctional Facility (ACF) and worked there until July 1992 when she took a medical leave of absence. Richardson alleges that while at ACF approximately ten incidents combined to create a racially hostile work environment that had “mental, emotional and physical” effects on her and that ultimately culminated in the medical leave she commenced on July 16, 1992.
The first incident occurred in February 1989, when Richardson attended a DOCS training session on stress management. At that session, the instructor, Father James Enright, offered a hypothetical (presumably as an example of a stressful situation) that Richardson deemed racially insensitive because it featured a local African-American family and was set at a local bar frequented by African-Americans. When Richardson objected to the example, Father Enright said something to the effect that “okay well take the same situation, different setting, three black guys.” Richardson’s complaints led to two meetings with supervisors to discuss the incident and Richardson ultimately received a written apology from Father Enright.
The second incident occurred in March 1990 when a supervisor, Mary Cuff, stated in Richardson’s presence that certain African-Americans who were suspects in a recent murder looked like “apes or baboons.” Richardson’s immediate supervisor, Debra Gardner, was present and laughed at the comment. The third incident occurred on Halloween in 1990 when a co-worker, Rita Campagnola, said to Richardson and others something to the effect that “all you spooks have a nice Halloween.” Richardson perceived that the word “spooks” was used as a derogatory term for Black people, and recalled that her co-workers all turned to look at her when the remark was made. The fourth and fifth incidents occurred during a training seminar in November 1990 when Richardson’s co-worker, Bob Greene, repeatedly made comments concerning “Arnold Schwarzenigger,” and another co-worker commented that an unidentified Caucasian had “some nerve bringing his brown-skinned wife to the party.”
Richardson’s complaints about these incidents prompted the DOCS Affirmative Action Office (the “DOCS AAO”) to commence an investigation in late 1990. To this end, DOCS AAO employee Denia Van Houter (Van Houter) looked into the “spooks,” “Arnold Schwarzenigger” and “brown-skinned wife” incidents. After interviewing eight individuals, Van Houter prepared a written report that concluded that the incidents in question occurred as Richardson alleged, and that although “the intent of the comments” appeared “to be for humorous, rather than malicious purposes,” “[a]ll interviewees except complainant ] appears to lack cultural/racial sensitivity.”
Van Houter further noted that at her December 6, 1990 visit to ACF she was “verbally attached [sic] simply because” she “was a Black female.” When asked at her deposition about the experience, Van Houter recalled telling her supervisor “I had just been through a meeting that reminded me of what it must have been like for blacks in the south who might have been lynched. I felt it was like a lynching meeting that I had just been through.”
Van Houter recommended that DOCS institute a “Cultural Awareness Training” program specifically tailored for the ACF staff, and her suggestion was endorsed by the Superintendent of ACF, Hans Walker, and his deputy, Ronald Nelson. Van Houter noted that if it were approved she could produce such a program within 60 days. No facility-specific program was ever held and no program of any kind was instituted until late 1993 or early 1994— some three years after Van Houter’s recommendation — when a system-wide program was commenced in response to a court order in a different case.
In the meantime, additional incidents occurred. The sixth overall incident occurred in May 1991 when Cuff commented on pictures of African-American inmates by saying that “black people are so dark you can’t see them anyway.” Richardson did not report this incident out of fear that her co-workers would stop talking to her as they had done after she complained of prior incidents.
The seventh incident occurred in October 1991 when Richardson overheard an unidentified co-worker comment, referring to Richardson, that he didn’t know that “there were any light-skinned niggers” working at ACF. Richardson reported this comment to the DOCS AAO as well as to her supervisor. The record does not indicate that any action was taken in response to the complaint.
The eighth incident occurred in February 1992 when an unidentified co-worker called Richardson a “nigger.” The ninth incident occurred during an April 1992 training session when, in response to an instructor’s question on how to address inmates a co-worker explained that he referred to them as “Buckwheat.” Richardson alleges that the instructors and other attendees laughed at the comment and that, despite her protests, the instructors failed to advise the class that use of the term was derogatory and could in fact be dangerous. Richardson complained about this incident in a May 1992 letter to DOCS superintendent Thpmas Coughlin, who responded with a letter in which he promised to prevent recurrence and assured Richardson that instructors were being reminded of the importance of sensitivity in all training programs. No. disciplinary action was taken against the co-worker or the supervisors who ran the training session, nor were the participants from that session advised that the term was derogatory and possibly dangerous.
The tenth and final incident occurred in June 1992 when two co-workers distributed a copy of a racially insensitive joke, titled “Farmer’s Dayvorce,” which included, among other things, use of the word “nigger.” Richardson complained to ACF Superintendent Walker and Deputy Nelson and DOCS immediately responded by firing the two workers who distributed the joke. Ultimately the workers were reinstated, but only after their union successfully challenged the terminations in administrative grievance proceedings; one of the workers was promoted to a supervisory position upon her return. In further response, Superintendent Walker wrote a memorandum, which was attached to all ACF employees’ July 9, 1992 paychecks, in which he plainly stated that DOCS prohibited racially insensitive comments and would punish those employees who violated that policy.
Richardson claims that emotional stress caused by racial harassment forced her to take the leave of absence in July 1992. While on that leave in December 1992, Richardson filed discrimination charges with the New York State Division of Human Rights (N.Y.SDHR) and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). Richardson returned to work in August 1993 at which time, she contends, the discrimination continued.
B. The Cayuga Correctional Facility
When Richardson returned from her leave of absence on August 15, 1993, she was assigned to work as a stores clerk at the commissary of a different prison, the Cayuga Correctional Facility (CCF). In contrast to her ACF position, Richardson’s new CCF position brought her into close proximity to the prison population. Richardson contends that at CCF she was again harassed because of her race, and furthermore was retaliated against for having complained about the discrimination she encountered at ACF. For the most part, both DOCS and the district court accepted Richardson’s CCF factual allegations as true for the purposes of the summary judgment motion and they are described below.
First, in August 1993, one of Richardson’s supervisors, James Mahunik, allegedly divulged Richardson’s home address to inmates and told an inmate to be wary of Richardson because she had caused a lot of problems and had gotten people fired at ACF. Richardson informed a program coordinator at CCF and the DOCS AAO about this incident. Almost a year later, in September 1994, co-worker Carol Gam-ba said, in the presence of Richardson and two supervisors, that “some people will do anything for money,” apparently referring to Richardson’s lawsuit. Richardson complained about this incident and DOCS investigated and concluded that Richardson had overheard only part of a conversation that was not about her. Furthermore, two co-workers called Richardson “stupid” and “ignorant” at least fifteen to twenty times during this period.
In October 1994, Richardson found horse manure in her parking spot, although the lot was fenced in and ordinarily would not have horse traffic. Richardson did not report this incident to anyone.
After work on April 12, 1995, while riding a commuter bus along with co-workers and a supervisor, Richardson was struck in the head by a rubber band fired by a coworker, Gamba. Richardson reported this incident to the CCF Superintendent who declined to investigate because the incident did not occur in the workplace. On April 19, 1995, Richardson’s counsel notified DOCS that plaintiff claimed to be experiencing “ongoing racial harassment” and requested that steps be taken to halt it.
Deposition notices in Richardson’s lawsuit were served in early June, 1995. The following incidents all occurred in June 1995: Richardson’s car was scratched in the parking lot; she found hair in her food on four occasions; she overheard co-workers inquire why she “wouldn’t just go work somewhere else;” she had other co-workers tell her that “we are not the crazy ones here;” she learned that a co-worker had been warned by other co-workers not to talk to Richardson because she took notes; her file cabinets were kept locked, in contrast to prior policy, which interfered with her ability to do her work; and she was not given telephone messages intended for her. When Richardson met with the Superintendent to discuss her concerns, he expressed the view that since many CCF employees lived near or had relatives at ACF, it might be difficult to “change their attitudes.”
Richardson also alleged that a co-worker made a “disparaging comment” about Native Americans; that Gamba stated that all of the Black inmates look alike; and that Quill remarked that Jewish people “like to hold on to their money.” Richardson could not, however, pinpoint when these incidents occurred.
By July 1995 Richardson felt she had “no alternative” but to take a medical leave of absence “in order to avoid suffering further emotional distress and mental anguish.” Richardson provided medical documentation to justify her absence for the period from July 24, 1995 through January 1, 1996, but failed to respond to DOCS’s request that she update the documentation to justify her absence from January 2, 1996 forward. In light of her failure to provide a satisfactory explanation for her unexcused absence, DOCS, relying on a provision of the governing collective bargaining agreement covering unexcused absences, deemed Richardson to have resigned as of January 15, 1996. Richardson claims that DOCS’s actions amounted to a retaliatory termination undertaken in retribution for her complaints about the discrimination she suffered.
Richardson filed this lawsuit on August 22, 1994 and filed a supplemental complaint in June 1996. After discovery, DOCS moved for summary judgment dismissing all claims and Richardson now appeals from the district court’s judgment granting that motion.
DISCUSSION
We review the district court’s grant of summary judgment de novo. Distasio v. Perkin Elmer Corp., 157 F.3d 55, 61 (2d Cir.1998). Summary judgment is properly granted only when “there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and ... the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c). When considering a motion for summary judgment the court must draw all factual inferences and resolve all ambiguities in favor of the nonmoving party. Torres v. Pisano, 116 F.3d 625, 630 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 118 S.Ct. 563, 139 L.Ed.2d 404 (1997).
A. Title VII — Hostile Environment Racial Harassment
Title VII makes it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against any individual with respect to the “compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(l). Here, Richardson proceeds under a “hostile work environment” theory, which requires her to establish (1) that the “workplace was permeated with discriminatory intimidation that was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [her] work environment, and (2) that a specific basis exists for imputing the conduct that created the hostile environment to the employer.” Schwapp v. Town of Avon, 118 F.3d 106, 110 (2d Cir.1997) (citation and internal quotation omitted); Torres, 116 F.3d at 630-31.
1. Hostile Environment
In Harris v. Forklift Systems, 510 U.S. 17, 114 S.Ct. 367, 126 L.Ed.2d 295 (1993), a sexual harassment case, the Supreme Court held that a Title VII hostile environment claim will succeed only where the conduct at issue is so “severe or pervasive” as to create an “ ‘objectively’ hostile or abusive work environment,” and where the victim “subjectively perceive[s] the environment to be abusive.” Id. at 21-22, 114 S.Ct. 367. Because there is no dispute that Richardson subjectively perceived her environment to be hostile and abusive, the question here reduces to whether the environment was “objectively” hostile. Richardson’s allegations should thus be evaluated to determine whether a reasonable person who is the target o

[truncated for spike corpus]