Case: Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Mustek Systems, Inc.
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
Date: 2003-08-07
Citation: 340 F.3d 1314
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 9103004

Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge DYK. Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge MAYER.
DYK, Circuit Judge.
Mustek Systems, Inc. and Mustek, Inc. (collectively “Mustek” or “appellants”) appeal the judgment of literal infringement of claims 1, 4, and 7-9 of United States Patent No. 5,836,878 (“the '878 patent”). Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Mustek Sys., Inc., No. 99-CV-0351, slip op. at 13-18 (S.D.Cal. Apr. 26, 2002) (“Order Re: Post-Trial Motions”). Hewlett-Packard Co. (“Hewlett” or “appellee”) cross-appeals the judgment of invalidity under 35 U.S.C. § 102 of claim 1 and under 35 U.S.C. § 103 of claims 1-8 of United States Patent No. 4,837,635 (“the '635 patent”). Id. at 5-10. On the main appeal, we vacate the judgment of infringement of the asserted claims of the '878 patent. On the cross appeal, we affirm the judgment of invalidity of the asserted claims of the '635 patent.
BACKGROUND
Hewlett is the assignee of the '878 and '635 patents, respectively titled “Variable Speed Single Pass Color Optical Scanner” and “A Scanning System in which a Portion of a Preview Scan Image of a Picture Displaced on a Screen is Selected and a Corresponding Portion of the Picture is Scanned in a Final Scan.” Both patents are generally directed to optical scanner technology, in which images and text from a document are converted into electronic data.
The '878 patent addresses the problem of correlating data received by three linear sensors 24, 26, and 28 (as shown in figure 4 reproduced below). The three linear sensors of the prior art and disclosed devices, which are positioned in fixed parallel relationship, each captures an optical spectral component corresponding respectively to the colors red, green, and blue (RGB). The document being scanned and the sensors move relative to each other so that the sensors scan across the image. The data collected at one sensor at a given time, however, will not correspond to the same portion of the image collected by another sensor at that same time. In order to correctly reproduce an electronic version of the scanned image, the data captured by the three sensors during the image scan must be properly correlated.
For scanners that operate solely at a single scan speed, the correlation of the color component data can be simply performed. A problem arises, however, in scanners that possess multiple selectable scanning speeds because the correlation step must account for the scan speed. The '878 patent discloses and claims systems and methods for performing this speed sensitive color component correlation by accounting for the speed selected by the operator of the scanner.
The '635 patent discloses and claims performing scanning operations in two steps, a low resolution scan (preview scan) followed by a high resolution scan (final scan).
Hewlett filed suit on February 26, 1999, alleging infringement by Mustek of five patents assigned to Hewlett. Of those five patents only the '878 and '635 remain on appeal, the claims and counterclaims associated with the other patents having been dismissed before trial. The issues of infringement and validity were tried to the jury. As to infringement, the jury found that Mustek literally infringed claims 1-8 of the '635 patent and claims 1, 4, 7-10, and 13 of the '878 patent. The jury did not address infringement under the doctrine of equivalents. Having found literal infringement, the jury did not mark either “yes” or “no” on the special verdict form as to that theory of infringement.
As to validity, the jury found that Mus-tek proved by clear and convincing evidence that claim 1 of the '635 patent was invalid based on U.S. Patent No. 4,631,599 to Cawkell (“Cawkell”) and that claims 1-8 of the '635 patent were “obvious in view of the prior art.” The jury rejected the remainder of Mustek’s invalidity arguments, finding the asserted claims of the '878 patent not invalid. The jury found that Mustek’s infringement of the '878 patent was not willful and granted $2,330,606 in lost profits damages and $638,500 in reasonable royalty damages.
On April 29, 2002, the district court declined to set aside the jury verdicts of infringement and invalidity. Although the jury had not addressed the issue of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents with respect to the claims of the '878 patent, and Hewlett’s motion had not requested judgment as a matter of law (JMOL) on this issue, the court granted JMOL of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents as to claims 1, 4, 7, 8-10, and 13 of the '878 patent. Order Re: Post-Trial Motions at 13-18. Finally, the court granted JMOL in favor of Mustek on the issue of damages, finding that the amount awarded by the jury was not supported by substantial evidence and that there was no basis for a new trial on damages. Id. at 18-24. Also on April 29, 2002, the district court issued a permanent injunction against Mustek. Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Mustek Sys., Inc., No. 99-CV-0351 (S.D.Cal. Apr. 26, 2002) (“Permanent Injunction ”). On May 22, 2002, the district court issued an order correcting the permanent injunction and JMOL order, holding claims 10 and 13 of the '878 patent invalid. Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Mustek Sys., Inc., No. 99-CV-0351 (S.D.Cal. May 22, 2002) (“Order Granting Defendants’ Application to Correct Injunction and JMOL Order”). Mustek filed a timely appeal of the final judgment. Hewlett filed a timely cross-appeal. We have jurisdiction over the appeal and the cross-appeal under 28 U.S.C. § 1295(a)(1).
DISCUSSION
We review the grant or denial of JMOL without deference by reapplying the JMOL standard of the district court. Rambus Inc. v. Infineon Techs. Ag, 318 F.3d 1081, 1086 (Fed.Cir.2003). We review the denial of a motion for a new trial for an abuse of discretion. Electro Sci. Indus, v. Gen. Scanning, Inc., 247 F.3d 1341, 1349 (Fed.Cir.2001). We review the jury’s factual determinations for substantial evidence. Union Carbide Chems. & Plastics Tech. Corp. v. Shell Oil Co., 308 F.3d 1167, 1177 (Fed.Cir.2002). We review issues of claim construction without deference. Cybor Corp. v. FAS Techs., Inc., 138 F.3d 1448, 1456 (Fed.Cir.1998) (en banc). We review “[the] jury’s conclusions on obviousness, a question of law, without deference, and the underlying findings of fact, whether explicit or implicit within the verdict, for substantial evidence.” LNP Eng’g Plastics, Inc. v. Miller Waste Mills, Inc., 275 F.3d 1347, 1353 (Fed.Cir.2001).
I
On the main appeal the issue is whether the jury verdict of literal infringement of claims 1, 4, and 7-9 of the '878 patent is supported by substantial evidence. We hold that it was not, and that JMOL should have been granted in favor of Mus-tek.
Claim 1 is the sole independent claim of the '878 patent at issue and provides in pertinent part “scan speed indicating means for generating a scan speed signal indicating a selected one of different scan speeds of said displacement means.” The district court interpreted this recitation as a means-plus-function recitation as provided under 35 U.S.C. § 112, ¶ 6. Based on this interpretation, the court instructed the jury as follows:
In claim 1, element f, beginning at column 14, line 54, the phrase, quote, “scan speed indicating means for generating a scan speed signal,” close quote, means either, “A,” a scan speed selector which, based on the user’s selection, generates a scan speed signal that indicates a selected one of different scan speeds; or, “B,” its equivalent.
The scan speed selector may be comprised of a pushbutton selector and a conventional L.C.D. display or the equivalent of such pushbutton selector and display.
A, quote, “scan speed signal,” close quote, is an electrical signal indicative of the user’s selected scan speed.
(Tr. at 2296) (emphasis added). Neither party objected to this instruction. But in connection with a post-trial motion for JMOL of non-infringement, Mustek urged that the district court should construe this limitation for JMOL purposes as requiring that “the user select a specific scanning speed (e.g., by pressing a button) and that the user know what that selected speed is (e.g., by looking at the scan speed selection display).” Defendants’ Memorandum of Points and Authorities in Support of Renewed Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law of Non-Infringement of U.S. Patent No. 5,336,878, at 9 (“Defendants’ JMOL Motion ”). In the post-trial order the district court described the requirement of the claim limitation as follows:
Here, the function of element (f) is twofold: (1) to allow a user to select different scan speeds for the displacement assembly; and (2) to generate a scan speed signal that is indicative of the selected scan speed. (See Ct. Rec. 232.) To support a finding of literal infringement, these two functions must be identical in the accused devices.
Mustek’s accused scanners can operate at two, three, or four different speeds (depending on the model). There is no button on the products that is labeled “push here to select speed.” However, the accused scanners do contain structures that allow a user to select resolution. Although there is no one-to-one correspondence between resolution and speed, there is some relationship between the two. ... When changing the resolution, the user may not know that he/she is changing the scan speed (in fact, the user may not know that scan speed is changing at all). Moreover, not all changes in resolution will result in a change of the scan speed.
For this JMOL motion, the question, in simplest form, is: was sufficient evidence presented for the jury to find that selecting resolution is “identical” to selecting scan speed?
Order Re: Post-Trial Motions at 14-15 (emphasis added). The court then analyzed Mustek’s infringement defenses, holding that 1) “there is no knowledge requirement” on the part of the scanner user; 2) “there is no one-to-one correspondence requirement” between the variable adjusted by the scanner user and the scan speed; and 3) “there is no requirement that speed be measured or indicated in any particular units.” Id. at 15-16. The claims so construed, the district court found that substantial evidence supported the jury’s verdict of literal infringement.
At the outset, we note that the parties cannot reserve issues of claim construction for the stage of post-trial motions. See Interactive Gift Express, Inc. v. CompuServe Inc., 256 F.3d 1323, 1345-46 (Fed.Cir.2001). When issues of claim construction have not been properly raised in connection with the jury instructions, it is improper for the district court to adopt a new or more detailed claim construction in connection with the JMOL motion. On JMOL, the issue here should have been limited to the question of whether substantial evidence supported the verdict under the agreed instruction. See Moba, B.V. v. Diamond Automation, Inc., 325 F.3d 1306, 1313-14 (Fed.Cir.2003). In other words, where the parties and the district court elect to provide the jury only with the claim language itself, and do not provide an interpretation of the language in the light of the specification and the prosecution history, it is too late at the JMOL stage to argue for or adopt a new and more detailed interpretation of the claim language and test the jury verdict by that new and more detailed interpretation. The verdict must be tested by the charge actually given and by giving the ordinary meaning of the language of the jury instruction. We hold that the verdict here was contrary to the undisputed facts and unsupported by substantial evidence because the accused devices do not, as required by the instruction, include “a scan speed selector which, based on the user’s selection, generates a scan speed signal that indicates a selected one of different scan speeds” wherein the scan speed signal is “an electrical signal indicative of the user’s selected scan speed.”
Under the jury instruction, the user must select the scan speed. This requires “choice” of a scan speed by the user. The undisputed evidence is that the user does not select scan speed in the accused devices, but rather a resolution. Order Re: Post-Trial Motions at 14-15. The selection of a resolution in the accused devices does not share a one-to-one correspondence with a resulting scan speed, but instead many different resolutions share identical scan speeds. Hewlett’s argument is that the selection of a resolution “necessarily” is a selection of scan speed. (Ap-pellee’s Br. at 4.) But it is not sufficient that another action by the user (resolution selection) results in a scan speed. By conceding that it is resolution and not scan speed that is selected by the user, Hewlett concedes that the accused devices do not perform the required function as defined in the instruction and thus that the accused devices do not literally infringe the asserted claims. See Lockheed Martin Corp. v. Space Sys./Loral, Inc., 324 F.3d 1308, 1320 (Fed.Cir.2003) (“Literal infringement of a § 112 ¶ 6 claim requires that the relevant structure in the accused device perform the identical function recited in the claim and be identical or equivalent to the corresponding structure in the specification.”). Thus, the jury verdict of literal infringement must be set aside.
II
Mustek also challenges the district court’s award of JMOL on the issue of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents. “An accused structure that does not literally infringe a means-plus-function claim may nevertheless infringe under the doctrine of equivalents.” Id. (providing that, whereas the equivalents analysis under 35 U.S.C. § 112, ¶ 6 requires identity of function, the doctrine of equivalents extends to insubstantially different functions). We' hold that the district court erred in awarding JMOL on this issue.
Having found literal infringement, the jury did not reach the question of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents. Order Re: Post-Trial Motions at 13 (noting that the jury was instructed to “mark only one box for each claim”). However, in response to post-trial motions for JMOL, the district court granted JMOL of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents. The court stated:
[T]he court finds that even if the evidence did not support literal infringement, JMOL of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents is appropriate. Specifically, the Court finds that the function of selecting “resolution” on the accused products is equivalent to the function of selecting “scan speed” referred to in the patent. Therefore, even if the jury verdict of literal infringement cannot be supported by the evidence, the Court grants HP’s Motion for JMOL of Infringement.
Id. at 17. This was improper, since no timely motion for JM0L of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents had been made. See Johnson v. N. Y., New Haven & Hartford R.R. Co., 344 U.S. 48, 50, 73 S.Ct. 125, 97 L.Ed. 77 (1952). In Johnson, the respondent submitted a motion to the district court to set aside the jury verdict. However, the appellate court entered judgment notwithstanding the verdict based on that motion. Id. The Supreme Court reversed, holding that "[r]espondent's motion should be treated as nothing but what it actually was, one to set aside the verdict-not one to enter judgment notwithstanding the verdict." Id. at 51, 73 S.Ct. 125. So too here, it was improper for the district court to expand Hewletts opposition to Musteks motion for JMOL of non-infringement to grant JMOL of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents in favor of Hewlett.
A new trial is also not appropriate because Hewlett did not make a sufficient rec6rd with respect to the equivalents claim. Hewlett argues that:
Dr. Stevenson confirmed his findings [of literal infringement] four different ways-external operation and observation, internal oscilloscope testing, review of the Mustek documents and depositions, and reverse engineering of Mus-tek's source code.... After explaining this evidence, Dr. Stevenson expanded his conclusions on literal 

[truncated for spike corpus]