Case: Devan v. Simon DeBartolo Group, L.P.
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Date: 1999-06-08
Citation: 180 F.3d 149
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11661843

Affirmed by published opinion. Judge ERVIN wrote the opinion, in which Judge HAMILTON and Chief Judge HILTON joined.
OPINION
ERVIN, Circuit Judge:
The question before this Court is what administrative priority, if any, should be given to a Chapter 11 postpetition commercial lease that is subsequently breached after Chapter 7 conversion. While under Chapter 11, Merry-Go-Round Enterprises, Inc. and its affiliated corporations (“MGRE”) voluntarily entered into a new lease with the Simon DeBartolo Group, L.P. (“DeBartolo”) for commercial property. When MGRE converted from Chapter 11 to Chapter 7, the newly-appointed Chapter 7 trustee Deborah Hunt Devan (the “Trustee”) breached the lease and returned the premises to De-Bartolo. DeBartolo filed a Chapter 7 administrative claim for damages which included future rent for the remainder of the lease. The bankruptcy court awarded DeBartolo a Chapter 11 administrative claim. See In re MGRE, 208 B.R. 637, 645 (Bankr.D.Md.1997). The district court affirmed.
Because we believe granting DeBartolo a Chapter 11 administrative claim best balances the competing interests of (1) encouraging parties to do business with a Chapter 11 estate against (2) preserving a Chapter 7 trustee’s discretion, we affirm the judgment of the district court.
I.
MGRE maintained approximately 1,450 retail clothing stores throughout the United States. Over 1,400 of these retail locations were leased. MGRE experienced financial difficulties and on January 11, 1994 MGRE voluntarily filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11.
Under Chapter 11, MGRE continued to operate and reorganize in an effort to salvage its failing business. During that time, MGRE entered into ten leases with DeBartolo for retail premises. The specific property at issue in this case is retail space located at the Cutler Ridge Mall in Miami, Florida. MGRE entered into a ten-year lease with DeBartolo for the Cutler Ridge property on August 19, 1994 commencing on December 1, 1994 with a monthly rent of $5,524,50. Article XXII of the lease, entitled “Default by Lessee,” stated:
In the event of any failure of [MGRE] to pay any installment of Minimum Rent or additional rent or any other payment required to be made by [MGRE] when due hereunder, ... or if [MGRE] shall be in breach of its obligations ... De-Bartolo shall have the immediate right to reenter the Premises ... and to dispossess [MGRE] ... [MGRE] shall be liable for and shall, pay [DeBartolo] any deficiency between the Minimum Rent and all items of additional rent reserved herein and the net avails ... of relet-ting, if any, for each month of the period which otherwise would have constituted the balance of the term of this Lease.
Seven months later, MGRE filed an unopposed Motion for Entry of Order Approving Post-Petition Lease of Nonresidential Real Property Known as Cutler Ridge Merry-Go-Round which stated that MGRE had “determined, in [its] business judgment, that it is in the best interest of the estates and creditors to seek Court approval of the Lease.” The bankruptcy court approved the lease on April 24, 1995 as “a post-petition lease entered into in the ordinary course of [MGRE’s] business pursuant to 11 U.S.C.A. § 363(c)(1), and for good cause.” In re MGRE, 208 B.R. at 639.
MGRE was unable to remain solvent under Chapter 11. One month before it converted to Chapter 7, MGRE submitted an Emergency Motion for Approval of Store Closing Sales at Retail Stores and the Retention of an Inventory Liquidation Agent to the bankruptcy court. MGRE requested a Chapter 11 liquidation going-out-of-business (“G.O.B..”) sale of merchandise at its retail stores including its Cutler Ridge Mall location. In this motion, MGRE stated that “(a) [MGRE is] no longer pursuing reorganization as an ongoing business, and (b) it is in the best interest of the estate to liquidate the inventory under the terms stated herein.” MGRE explicitly stated that one of the purposes of its Chapter 11 liquidation was to avoid administrative claims:
[MGRE] believes that the requested relief is in the best interest of the estate and creditors. Given the inability of [MGRE] to continue as an ongoing concern and the continued risk of depletion of the estate through ongoing administrative claims, this arrangement represents the best reasonably available prospect for [MGRE] to quickly convert inventory into cash for the benefit of creditors and to terminate administrative claims against the estate as quickly as possible.
The bankruptcy court approved the G.O.B. sale on February 22, 1996 in an order stating in relevant part:
ORDERED that the [Liquidating] Agent shall have the right to use the Stores and all furniture, fixtures and equipment in the Stores ... for the purpose of G.O.B. sales free of any interference from third parties!;]
ORDERED that, without prejudice to other claims and statutory rights of landlords, [MGRE] shall pay timely all rent and other charges due under the leases for the period commencing February 1, 1996, and continuing until such time as [MGRE] and/or the agent are no longer conducting G.O.B. sales on the premises; and it is further
ORDERED that this Order shall be binding upon any subsequent trustee appointed under either Chapter 11 or Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.
On March 1, 1996, the bankruptcy court converted MGRE to Chapter 7 and the next day appointed the Chapter 7 trustee. A number of landlords, including DeBarto-lo, jointly filed a Motion to Compel Chapter 7 Trustee’s Immediate Payment of Post-Petition Rent for Assumed and Court-Approved Post-Petition Nonresidential Real Property Leases to secure payment of their leases. In an effort to liquidate the remaining leases and begin repaying claims against MGRE, the Trustee filed a Motion Authorizing Trustee to Conduct an Auction Sale of Certain Leasehold Interests on March 25, 1996. Therein, the Trustee stated that she
had determined, in the exercise of her sound business judgment, that the assumption, assignment, and sale of the Lease may be in the best interests of the Trustee and the estates.... The Chapter 11 estate assumed almost 69 prepetition leases. Further, the Chapter 11 estate entered into 18 leases or renewals during the Chapter 11. Unless those leases are sold, the estate may be liable for substantial damages under those leases as administrative expenses.
The bankruptcy court granted both motions. The court granted the landlords’ motion in part on March 28, 1996, ordering that, pursuant to 11 U.S.C.A. § 365(d)(3), “the Trustee shall timely perform the monthly rent obligations but on an apportioned biweekly basis, for the 60 day po-stconversion period through April 30, 1996 for [MGRE]’s nonresidential, assumed and postpetition leases.” In re MGRE, 208 B.R. at 640. The court also granted the Trustee’s motion, authorizing a sale by auction of the leases on March 29, 1996. It considered the landlords’ objections to the auction moot because, in part, “[t]he Trustee has previously represented to this court that she will pay the rent on those leases that had been assumed by the Debt- or or entered into postpetition.” Id.
The Trustee then negotiated a settlement with DeBartolo concerning nine of its leases. In an Order Approving Overbids (the “Overbid Order”) dated May 3, 1996, DeBartolo waived “all of its past, present and future claims” with respect to nine of the ten leases in exchange for $50,000 from the Trustee. DeBartolo conceded that it possesses no administrative claims with regard to these nine leases. Although these nine leases were “terminated” by the Overbid Order, the remaining lease—the Cutler Ridge lease—was “deemed rejected.” The next day, the Trustee returned possession of the Cutler Ridge premises to DeBartolo.
On July 8, 1996, the claims bar date, DeBartolo filed proof of a claim for (1) $16,013.62 in damages as a Chapter 11 administrative claim arising from MGRE’s past use of the Cutler Ridge premises and (2) $1,322,265.48 for future rent as a Chapter 7 administrative claim arising from the Trustee’s breach of the Cutler Ridge lease. Because the Trustee objected to this claim as a Chapter 7 administrative expense, a hearing concerning it was held on December 6,1996.
On May 16, 1997, the bankruptcy court issued a published memorandum opinion holding that DeBartolo was entitled not to a Chapter 7 administrative claim, but rather a Chapter 11 administrative claim. See In re MGRE, 208 B.R. at 645. The Trustee appealed to the district court on May 28, 1997. DeBartolo cross-appealed on June 6, 1997. On December 24, 1997, the district court affirmed the bankruptcy court’s decision in an unpublished opinion. The Trustee appealed to this Court on January 13, 1998. DeBartolo has not cross-appealed.
II.
We review the district court’s findings of fact for clear error, see Fed R. Bankr.P. 8013, and its conclusions of law de novo. See In re K & L Lakeland, Inc., 128 F.3d 203, 206 (4th Cir.1997). This Court reviews statutory interpretation of the Bankruptcy Code de novo. See Ford Motor Credit Co. v. Dobbins, 35 F.3d 860, 865 (4th Cir.1994). Since the relevant language of the Bankruptcy Code here is inconclusive, we must examine the purpose and policy behind the relevant provisions to determine whether the landlord in this case should be granted an administrative claim for future rent. Because this case is an appeal of a district court’s judgment affirming a bankruptcy court’s final order, this Court has appellate jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.A. § 158(d) (West 1999).
III.
The Trustee argued on appeal that De-Bartolo’s claim for damages was not entitled to administrative priority because it: (1) was not “actual and necessary” under 11 U.S.C.A. § 503(b) (West 1999); (2) was rejected pursuant to either (a) the Overbid Order or (b) 11 U.S.C.A. § 365 (West 1999); and (3) does not qualify as a pre-petition claim under 11 U.S.C.A. §§ 348 and 365(g) (West 1999). The Trustee also argued that even if DeBartolo’s claim is entitled to administrative priority, it is still subject to the rent cap of 11 U.S.C.A. § 502(b)(6) (West 1999). We address each of these arguments below.
A.
Before we can address the Trustee’s first argument, we must determine whether future rent as a matter of law can ever be granted administrative priority. We conclude as a matter of law that future rent may be granted administrative priority.
The only authority we have been able to locate concerning the administrative priority of the future rent of a lease entered into post-petition is In re Lamparter Org., Inc., 207 B.R. 48 (E.D.N.Y.1997). The sole issue in Lamparter was “whether ... [a] claim for future rent under a long-term lease entered into with a Chapter 11 debtor in possession constituted] an administrative expense to be given priority at the time of the distribution of the bankrupt’s estate.” Id. at 49.
The facts of Lamparter are markedly similar to the instant case. In Lamparter, after the Chapter 11 debtor-in-possession negotiated a new postpetition lease, the bankruptcy court issued an order authorizing the lease. Id. Some eight months later, the estate defaulted on the lease and the bankruptcy court converted the case to Chapter 7. About one month later, the estate returned possession of the premises to the landlord. Id. at 49-50. Among its claims, the landlord asserted a Chapter 11 administrative claim for future rent. The bankruptcy court denied granting future rent administrative priority, ruling that it was a general unsecured claim. The landlord appealed and the district court reversed. After examining a Second Circuit opinion concerning the administrative priority of the future rent of a prepetition lease assumed postpetition, In re Klein Sleep Products, Inc., 78 F.3d 18 (2d Cir.1996), the district court adopted the reasoning of the Second Circuit and held that the future rent was entitled to administrative priority. Lamparter, 207 B.R. at 50-52.
Like Klein Sleep, the remaining authority concerns the future rent of a prepetition lease assumed postpetition. We believe that this authority is equally applicable to the present case because the perfection of a new postpetition lease is analogous to the postpetition assumption of a prepetition lease in that the debtor-in-possession undergoes the same deliberative process when it enters into a new lease as when it assumes an old one. When considering whether or not to enter into a new lease, the debtor-in-possession examines a draft lease and determines whether or not it would be in the best interest of the estate. If the debtor-in-possession concludes that the new lease would be in its best interest, it seeks approval from the bankruptcy court. Likewise, when considering whether or not to assume an unexpired lease, the debtor-in-possession examines the unexpired lease and determines whether or not it would be in the best interest of the estate. If the debtor-in-possession concludes that the lease would be in its best interest, it assumes the unexpired lease and seeks approval from the bankruptcy court.
In further support, the old Bankruptcy Act did not distinguish between assumed prepetition and new postpetition contracts for the purposes of administrative priority. The Supreme Court has given prior practice under the old Bankruptcy Act significant weight when construing new or ambiguous terms of the current Bankruptcy Code. See, e.g., Dewsnup v. Timm, 502 U.S. 410, 419, 112 S.Ct. 773, 116 L.Ed.2d 903 (1992) (“When Congress amends the bankruptcy laws, it does not write on a clean slate.”) (citations omitted). The previous Bankruptcy Act unambiguously stated that “[w]hen a contract entered into or assumed in a superseded proceeding is rejected, the resulting liability shall constitute a cost of administration of the superseded proceeding.” 11 U.S.C.A. §§ 238(b), 378(b), 483(b)(1898 & Supp.1967) (repealed 1978), quoted in Chugiak, 18 B.R. at 295 n. 5. We find this prior practice persuasive.
Since we believe an assumed lease is functionally analogous to a postpetition lease, we will apply authority concerning the future rent of assumed leases to the present case.
The majority of courts that have examined this issue have concluded that future rent from an assumed lease may be granted administrative priority. The Second Circuit has commented that granting administrative priority to future rent causes “two competing bankruptcy policies — promoting parity among creditors and yet granting priority to the claims of creditors who continue to do business with an insolvent debtor — [to] collide.” Klein Sleep, 78 F.3d at 20. After examining past practice under the Bankruptcy Act and these competing policy considerations, the Second Circuit held that future rent is entitled to administrative priority. Id. at 28.
At least one court has refused to grant future rent from an assumed lease administrative priority. See In re Johnston, Inc., 164 B.R. 551 (Bankr.E.D.Tex.1994). The bankruptcy court in Johnson concluded that “[ujnlike the other courts which have addressed the issue, this Court is not convinced that the loss of future rents should be preferred over general unsecured claims.” Id. at 554. The Johnson court held that future rent accruing after the lessee had vacated and returned the premises was no longer beneficial to the estate. Id. It believed that granting future rent administrative status would unjustly enrich the landlord with a windfall to the detriment of the other creditors. Id.
After examining these two lines of cases, we side with the majority of courts that have held that future rent is entitled to administrative priority. In contrast to the Johnson court’s belief that future rent should not be entitled to administrative priority when the premises have been returned to the landlord, we agree with the Second Circuit that “[s]uch a holding would mean that any post-bankruptcy contract, entered into for the benefit of a bankrupt’s estate, would cease to be entitled to priority the moment the deal

[truncated for spike corpus]