Case: Poradisova v. Gonzales
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
Date: 2005-08-16
Citation: 420 F.3d 70
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 8934190

STRAUB, Circuit Judge.
Petitioners Tatiana Poradisova and Gen-nadi Poradisov and their son Pavel Poradi-sov (“Poradisovs”) petition for review of Board of Immigration Appeals (“BIA”) decisions summarily affirming the denial of their asylum application and denying their motion to reopen. The Poradisovs argue that the Immigration Judge (“IJ”) and BIA erred in 1) finding that the Poradisovs failed to meet their burden of proof despite their extensive and detailed testimony, 2) finding that the abuse they recounted did not amount to persecution, and 3) failing to take note of the record evidence of general antisemitism in Belarus. With respect to their motion to reopen, the Poradisovs argue that the BIA’s denial was an abuse of discretion because they had met their burden of showing materially worsened conditions in Belarus since their original application.
We agree with the Poradisovs that the IJ’s legal analysis was flawed in a number of significant respects, and that the BIA’s affirmance of her decision must therefore be vacated. Specifically, the IJ erred in dismissing certain portions of the Poradi-sovs’ testimony for lack of corroboration (much of which, in all likelihood, was not reasonably available), in failing to consider the cumulative significance of the events described, in drawing adverse inferences from the Poradisovs’ decision not to seek protection from the police or seek asylum from the United States Consulate in Belarus, in dismissing Tatiana’s account of anonymous threats solely because the threats were anonymous, and in dismissing as irrelevant evidence that similarly-situated friends of the Poradisovs had been persecuted. As an additional ground for remand, we hold that the BIA abused its discretion in denying the Poradisovs’ motion to reopen because it inexplicably dismissed as “merely cumulative” the strong evidence they presented that antisemitism in Belarus is virulent and on the rise. For both these reasons, either of which would suffice for remand, we grant the petitions for review, vacate the BIA decision affirming the IJ’s denial of asylum, reverse the BIA decision denying the motion to reopen, and remand for further proceedings in conformity with this opinion.
BACKGROUND
The Poradisovs-Tatiana and Gennadi and their son Pavel-are part-Jewish Bela-rusians from the city of Minsk who arrived in the United States in 1991 and 1992 and immediately applied for asylum based on ethnic/religious persecution. For unknown reasons, their first hearing before an IJ did not take place until October 1997. In the series of hearings that followed, Tatia-na and Gennadi testified that throughout their lives they were mistreated because of their Jewish ethnicity.
The Poradisovs’ testimony, somewhat distilled, is as follows. Tatiana’s father, who was not Jewish, was harassed by neighbors in their high-rise apartment about having married a Jewish woman-told, for example, that his wife had an offensive odor-to the point where he eventually moved out of the apartment, although he stayed in contact with the family and assisted them financially. At the end of eighth grade, because they were Jewish, Tatiana and a friend were forced by their school to transfer to another, more distant school. When Gennadi was in eighth grade, his class was talking about WWII, and a negative comment was made about Jews (questioning their loyalty to Russia). Gennadi protested because his grandfather had been killed in the Holocaust. He was taken into the basement of the school and badly beaten by several of his classmates. He suffered a head injury and a broken nose and finger, and had to be hospitalized.
This abuse allegedly continued into Tati-ana’s and Gennadi’s adulthood. In 1988, Tatiana and Gennadi participated in a peaceful demonstration in memory of Jews who died in WWII. (Gennadi participated every year.) The demonstration was violently attacked by an antisemitic group, although neither of the Poradisovs was physically harmed. The police came and, rather than arresting the attackers, arrested the Jewish demonstrators for “organizing a fight in a public place.” A good friend of the Poradisovs’ was arrested and “beat up very badly” in prison. He was marked as an “activist Zionist” on his work papers, and thereafter was unable to find work. He left for the United States, where he currently resides.
In another alleged incident, the son of good friends of the Poradisovs, also Jewish, committed suicide after being verbally and physically abused by his classmates. In a suicide note, the boy stated that he could no longer live as an “ever persecuted kike.” According to the Poradisovs, their friends had tried to convince the school to intervene, without success. Tatiana testified that she feared that her young son, Pavel, would face similar abuse when he started attending school. The Poradisovs also described, as a general aspect of life, that antisemitic groups would distribute fliers, send letters, and make phone calls threatening Jews and inciting others to attack them. As a result of this atmosphere, the Poradisovs refrained from going out at night because they believed that they would be physically attacked by ultra-nationalists.
Sometime after Pavel was born, the Po-radisovs purchased a local business selling ice cream. Tatiana testified that they were continually harassed by the authorities and forced to renovate and pay fines, even though their premises were far cleaner than other stores. On September 3, 1991, their ice cream store was burned down. The Poradisovs did not witness the event, but a neighbor who lived across the street told them that the men who attacked the store were shouting “dirty Jews” and similar epithets. The neighbor called the police, but when they came, they gave her the impression that nothing would be done about the incident and that it would be better not to pursue the case.
Also in 1991, Gennadi left Belarus for the United States. Tatiana testified that, after he left, the local authorities began visiting her and asking her questions about her husband. She also received threatening phone calls, beginning in Spring, 1992, accusing her husband of being a traitor and telling her to leave or she or her son would be killed. Their home was also broken into and vandalized at this time.
The 1997 and 1998 State Department country reports in the record described growing societal antisemitism met by governmental inaction, antisemitic media, official antisemitic statements made as propaganda against the opposition party, desecration of Jewish cemeteries, and some targeting of prominent Jewish individuals for harassment or prosecution.
The IJ denied the Poradisovs’ claims in a decision issued September 20, 1999, finding that they had “failed to demonstrate sufficient evidence to be entitled to” asylum. Although the IJ did not make an adverse credibility determination, she found parts of the Poradisovs’ account “nebulous,” noted the lack of documentary evidence that Tatiana was part-Jewish, and found that certain facts “undermined” their claim-namely, that the Poradisovs never filed police complaints, that the threatening callers never identified themselves, that the Poradisovs did not inform the American Consulate of their alleged reason for leaving Belarus, that Gennadi was able to graduate from high school and later to find employment by a state company, and that the Poradisovs had failed to submit any supporting affidavits from family or friends. As for the specific incidents described, the IJ found that each, considered individually, fell short of amounting to persecution because they were either remote in time, insufficient in degree, or (in the case of attacks on the Poradisovs’ friends) not sufficiently connected to their own situation. The BIA summarily affirmed the IJ’s decision in an order dated October 10, 2002, and the Poradisovs filed petitions for review by this Court.
In January, 2003, the Poradisovs also moved to reopen their case based on worsened antisemitism in Belarus. In support of this motion, they submitted the 2001 State Department report on Belarus which characterized the overall human rights situation as “[still] very poor and worse[ ] in several areas.” Pertinent to the Poradi-sovs’ claims, the report observed that “[rjegime officials took a number of hostile actions toward the Jewish community” as well as toward other minority faiths, and connected this hostility to a dominant “Slavic Unity”/pro-Russia philosophy. Specifically, the Report stated that the government does nothing to counter the spread of antisemitic literature and antisemitic vandalism; harasses proselytizing messianic Jews; arrested Jews picketing the illegal destruction of a synagogue in Minsk (the Poradisovs’ home city), and prosecuted one of the picketers; makes openly antisemitic statements; refuses to create memorials to Belarusian Holocaust victims or help maintain Jewish cemeteries or monuments; and refused to investigate the recent firebombing of a synagogue in Minsk. The report further found that “[s]ocietal anti-Semitism persisted and sentiment critical of minority faiths increased,” with “a number of small, ultrana-tionalist organizations operating] on the fringes of society, and a number of newspapers regularly printing] antisemitic material” as well as antisemitic material from Russia “circulating] widely.” The Poradi-sovs presented other official statements as to the “accelerating deterioration of respect for human rights in Belarus” and the Belarusian government’s “outlaw” status in Europe.
The Poradisovs also submitted several reports by the advocacy groups National Conference for Soviet Jewry and Union of Councils for Soviet Jews. These reports warn that openly antisemitic individuals have been appointed to head the government agency that controls the media and have themselves appointed antisemitic and neo-Nazi editors to particular magazines. They also report that neo-Nazis attacked a Jewish Sunday school, and officials tried to close that same school for promoting “Zionist propaganda”; that there have been arson and other attacks on Jewish organizations; that antisemitic graffiti (such as swastikas, a Star of David hanging from a gallows, and exhortations to kill Jews) is widespread; that Jewish cemeteries have been desecrated; and that the government is unwilling to protect Jews.
The BIA summarily denied the motion on August 28, 2003, stating without elaboration that the documents submitted “are merely cumulative to the original asylum claim and do not show materially changed circumstances in Belarus.” The Poradi-sovs petition this Court for review of the BIA’s 2003 decision, and their petitions have been consolidated with their earlier petitions.
DISCUSSION
I. Standard of Review
The scope of our review of an IJ’s factual findings is narrow, and we uphold such findings so long as they are supported by “substantial evidence.” Jin Shui Qiu v. Ashcroft, 329 F.3d 140, 148 (2d Cir.2003) (internal quotation marks omitted). The “substantial evidence” standard, however, is slightly stricter than the dear-error standard generally applied to a district court’s factual findings. Id. at 149. We require “more than a mere scintilla” of evidence, or “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.” Alvarado-Carillo v. INS, 251 F.3d 44, 49 (2d Cir.2001) (internal quotation marks omitted).
By contrast, we review de novo the IJ’s determination of mixed questions of law and fact, as well as the the IJ’s application of law to facts. Secaida-Rosales v. INS, 331 F.3d 297, 307 (2d Cir.2003); Jin Shui Qiu, 329 F.3d at 149; Alvarado-Carillo, 251 F.3d at 49; Diallo v. INS, 232 F.3d 279, 287 (2d Cir.2000). Importantly, the IJ’s application of an “inappropriately stringent standard when evaluating an applicant’s testimony” is considered an error of law. Secaida-Rosales, 331 F.3d at 307 (2d Cir.2003); see also Islami v. Gonzales, 412 F.3d 391, 396 (2d Cir.2005).
Despite our generally deferential review of IJ and BIA opinions, we require a certain minimum level of analysis from the IJ and BIA opinions denying asylum, and indeed must require such if judicial review is to be meaningful. See, e.g., Diallo, 232 F.3d at 287-89 (vacating a decision because the BIA failed to make a credibility finding, explain why its demand for corroborative evidence was reasonable, or assess Diallo’s stated reasons for failing to provide certain corroboration); Anderson v. McElroy, 953 F.2d 803, 806 (2d Cir.1992) (“[W]e cannot assume that the BIA considered factors that it failed to mention in its decision.” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Sanon v. INS, 52 F.3d 648, 651 (7th Cir.1995) (explaining that courts of appeals defer to BIA rulings only where there is “proof that the Board has exercised its expertise in hearing a case” (emphasis added)). We also require some indication that the IJ considered material evidence supporting a petitioner’s claim. Yan Chen v. Gonzales, 417 F.3d 268 (2d Cir.2005) (IJ erred in failing to consider favorable country condition reports). Inadequate analysis or failure to consider important evidence, moreover, “are not excused by the fact that a hypothetical adjudicator, applying the law correctly, might also have denied the petition for asylum.” Jin Shui Qiu, 329 F.3d at 149.
We review denials of motions to reopen for abuse of discretion. Iavorski v. INS, 232 F.3d 124, 128 (2d Cir.2000). Although the BIA has broad discretion in deciding such motions, it abuses this discretion if it acts in an “arbitrary or capricious manner,” or if its decision “provides no rational explanation, inexplicably departs from established policies, is devoid of any reasoning, or contains only summary or conelusory statements.” Ke Zhen Zhao v. U.S. Dep’t of Justice, 265 F.3d 83, 93 (2d Cir.2001) (internal citations omitted); see also Mohammed v. Gonzales, 400 F.3d 785, 792 (9th Cir.2005) (“[T]he BIA must issue a decision that fully explains the reasons for denying a motion to reopen.”).
II. The governing law
A. Asylum applications
To establish eligibility for asylum, a petitioner must show that he has suffered past persecution on account of “race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion,” or that he has a well-founded fear of future persecution on these grounds. See 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42); Diallo, 232 F.3d at 284. A showing of past persecution, although rarely sufficient in itself to entitle an applicant to asylum, automatically gives rise to a rebuttable presumption of a well-founded fear of future persecution, which the government can only overcome if “a preponderance of the evidence establishes that a change in circumstances in the applicant’s country of nationality has occurred such that the applicant’s fear is no longer well-founded.” Guan Shan Liao v. U.S. Dep’t of Justice, 293 F.3d 61, 67 (2d Cir.2002) (citing 8 C.F.R. § 208.13(b)(1)i)). “An alien’s fear may be well-founded even if there is only a slight, though discernible, chance of persecution.” Diallo, 232 F.3d at 284 (citing INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 431, 107 S.Ct. 1207, 94 L.Ed.2d 434 (1987)).
B. Motions to reopen
An asylum applicant may, at any time, move to reopen his case “based on changed circumstances arising in the country of nationality or in the country to which deportation has been ordered, if such evidence is material and was not available and could not have been discovered or presented at the previous hearing.” 8 C.F.R. § 1003.2(c)(3)(ii) (2003). To prevail on the motion, the movant must also establish prima facie eligibility for asylum, ie., “a realistic chance” that he will be able to establish eligibility. Guo v. Ashcroft, 386 F.3d 556, 563-64 (3d Cir.2004) (reversing denial of motion to reopen as having been based on an overly strict standard); see also Reyes v. INS, 673 F.2d 1087, 1089 (9th Cir.1982).
When an applicant moves to reopen his 

[truncated for spike corpus]