Case: Yousefi v. U.S. Immigration & Naturalization Service
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Date: 2001-08-08
Citation: 260 F.3d 318
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 9496849

OPINION
PER CURIAM:
Mohammad Musa Yousefi (“Yousefi”) filed this petition for review of an order of the Board of Immigration Appeals (“the Board”) concluding that Yousefi was de-portable and that he was ineligible for asylum and withholding of deportation. The Immigration and Naturalization Service (“the Service”) contends that we do not possess jurisdiction to review Yousefi’s petition. We hold that we have jurisdiction to consider Yousefi’s petition. On the merits, we agree with the Board that Yousefi is deportable; however, in our view, the Board’s decision that Yousefi committed a “particularly serious crime,” rendering him ineligible for asylum and withholding of deportation, was arbitrary and must be set aside. Accordingly, we remand for further consideration of whether Yousefi was convicted of a particularly serious crime.
I.
Yousefi, a native of Afghanistan, entered the United States in 1987 as a lawful permanent resident. Less than one year after entering the United States, Yousefi was arrested for willfully concealing a poncho belonging to a K Mart store with the intent to convert it to his own use, in violation of Virginia law. See Va.Code Ann. § 18.2-103. Yousefi pled nolo conten-dere and received a ten-day sentence, which was suspended.
In 1988, Yousefi was charged in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia with assault with a dangerous weapon, see 22 D.C.Code Ann. § 22-502, and assault with intent to kill while armed with a dangerous weapon, see D.C.Code Ann. §§ 22-502, 22-3202. He pled guilty to assault with a dangerous weapon and received a prison sentence of 15 to 45 months, which was suspended, and 15 months probation. The assault with intent to kill charge was dismissed. The dangerous weapon charged in the indictment was a rock.
Finally, in December 1989, Yousefi was again charged with willfully concealing store merchandise in violation of section 18.2-103 of the Virginia Code. He pled guilty and received a suspended ten-day sentence.
In June 1991, based on these three convictions, the Service issued an order to show cause seeking to deport Yousefi under what was then section 241(a)(2)(A)(ii) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), see 8 U.S.C. § 1251(a)(2)(A)(ii) (Supp. IV 1992), for having been convicted of two crimes of moral turpitude not arising from the same scheme of criminal con-'dúct, and section 241(a)(2)(A)®, see 8 U.S.C. § 1251(a)(2)(A)® (Supp. IV Í992), for having been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude within five years after entry and sentenced to confinement for a year or more.
Before the immigration judge, Yousefi admitted the underlying crimes but denied deportability on the basis that the crimes were not crimes of moral turpitude because they were petty in scope and nature. The immigration judge disagreed with Yousefi, and concluded that all three crimes qualified as crimes of moral turpitude. Yousefi then petitioned the immigration judge for relief from deportation. He sought asylum under INA § 208(a) and withholding of deportation under INA § 243(h)(1). The immigration judge concluded that
Yousefi was statutorily ineligible for withholding of deportation because the conviction for assault with a dangerous weapon amounted to a “particularly serious crime.” See INA § 243(h)(2)(B), 8 U .S.C. § 1253(h)(2)(B). And, the immigration judge ultimately determined that Yousefi was ineligible for asylum under the regulations accompanying the INA. See 8 C.F.R. § 208.14(c) (1992).
On appeal to the Board, Yousefi challenged' the immigration judge’s conclusion that he was ineligible for asylum and withholding of deportation as well as the determination that he was deportable in the first place. The Board agreed with the immigration judge that all three underlying convictions were for crimes of moral turpitude and that Yousefi was therefore deportable under INA § 241(a)(2)(A)® and INA § 241(a)(2)(A)(ii). The Board rejected the argument that the concealment convictions were too petty to constitute crimes of moral turpitude, noting that “both the courts and the Board have his-torieally held that crimes of theft involve moral turpitude, regardless of the amount stolen or the sentence imposed.” A.R. 4. With respect to Yousefi’s eligibility for asylum or withholding of deportation, the Board concluded that Yousefi was barred from relief because the conviction for assault with a dangerous weapon was a “particularly serious crime.” The Board dismissed Yousefi’s appeal.
Yousefi petitions us for review of the Board’s decision. He raises the same arguments he raised below; however, Youse-fi makes the additional argument that the proceedings before the immigration judge failed to comport with due process. The Service, however, suggests that under IIR-IRA § 309(c)(4)(G), which was enacted after the immigration judge’s 1992 decision but before the Board rendered its decision in 2000, we lack jurisdiction to entertain the petition for review. If we do have jurisdiction, the Service contends that the Board correctly disposed of the merits.
H.
We first consider the question of subject matter jurisdiction. The Service contends that IIRIRA § 309(c)(4)(G) strips us of jurisdiction to review the Board’s decision. Section 309(c)(4) of IIRIRA contains transitional rules for judicial review that apply to aliens who were involved in deportation proceedings prior to April 1, 1997, and were issued a final deportation order more than thirty days after September 30, 1996, the date IIRIRA was enacted. These transitional rules apply to Yousefi, who was placed into deportation proceedings in February 1992 but was not issued a final order until February 28, 2000.
The transitional rules direct that
there shall be no appeal permitted in the case of an alien who is inadmissible or deportable by reason of having committed a criminal offense covered in ... section 241(a)(2)(A)(iii), (B), (C), or (D) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (as in effect as of [September 30, 1996]).
IIRIRA § 309(c)(4)(G). The Service insists that Yousefi’s conviction for assault with a dangerous weapon constituted an aggravated felony under INA § 241(a)(2)(A)(iii). That section provided that “[a]ny alien who is convicted of an aggravated felony at any time after admission is deportable.” See INA § 241(a)(2)(A)(iii), 8 U.S.C. § 1251(a)(2)(A)(iii) (Supp. IV 1992). Therefore, the Service contends, that Yousefi was “deportable by reason of having committed a criminal offense covered in ... section 241(a)(2)(A)(iii),” precluding this court from exercising jurisdiction over his petition for review.
As we have observed numerous times, “the jurisdictional limitation under the transitional rules [is] triggered by two jurisdictional facts — whether the deportee [is] an alien and whether he' [has] been convicted of an offense enumerated in the statute.” Lewis v. INS, 194 F.3d 539, 542 (4th Cir.1999). Regardless of the eventual outcome of our jurisdictional analysis, we always have the power to assess whether such jurisdictional facts are present. See id. (“Because our jurisdiction turns on the presence, or lack thereof, of these two facts, we have jurisdiction to review them.”). Yousefi is an alien. The only question is whether he is deportable by reason of having committed an aggravated felony within the meaning of INA § 241(a)(2)(A)(iii).
Before we can address this issue, however, we must first consider the consequences of the Service’s failure to charge Yousefi’s commission of an aggravated felony as a legal ground for deporting him. Although the Service included Yousefi’s conviction for assault with a dangerous weapon in the factual allegations contained in the order to show cause, the Service did not seek to deport Yousefi on the ground that he committed an aggravated felony under INA § 241 (a)(2)(A)(iü.). Rather, the Service charged that Yousefi was deporta-ble because he had committed two or more crimes of moral turpitude under INA § 241(a)(2) (A) (ii), and that he had committed'a crime of moral turpitude within five years. after entry under INA § 241(a)(2)(A)®. Thus, although Yousefi’s conviction for assault with a dangerous weapon was one of the predicate crimes of moral turpitude, the Service did not raise the aggravated felony ground for deporta-bility in its order to show cause, in the proceedings before the immigration judge, or during the appeal to the Board.
The Service takes the position that as long as an alien has been convicted of a crime covered under IIRIRA. § 809(c)(4)(G), then he “is inadmissible or deportable by reason of’ such conviction regardless of whether such conviction served as the basis for deportation. According to the Service, the jurisdiction-stripping effect of IIRIRA § 309(c)(4)(G) is triggered simply by an alien’s commission of an aggravated felony at any time after entry into the United States — the alien does not ever have to actually be charged by the Service with committing an aggravated felony.
Yousefi argues that it is fundamentally unfair for him now to be denied appellate review based on a ground — the commission of an aggravated felony — that was not charged by the Service as a basis for deporting him. Yousefi never had an opportunity below to challenge the legal characterization of his assault conviction as an aggravated felony. He suggests that due process requires that he first be permitted to mount his challenge before the immigration judge.
It is important to recognize that Yousefi’s complaint is that the Service has asserted a new legal ground for deportation; the factual ground for saying that Yousefi committed an aggravated felony— the conviction for assault with a dangerous weapon — is not new and was included by the Service in its order to show cause. This distinction is important because we are generally permitted to “look only to the offense of conviction itself to determine whether we have jurisdiction” rather than the circumstances surrounding the conviction. Hall v. INS, 167 F.3d 852, 856 (4th Cir.1999). Thus, when “a criminal statute on its face fits, the INA’s deportability classification, all convictions under that statute necessarily render an alien deport-able.” Id. Yousefi’s conviction is contained in the record; whether it can be characterized as an aggravated felony under the INA is purely a question of law that requires no additional factual development. Yousefi has certainly had an- opportunity in this court to argue against the. classification of his assault offense as an aggravated felony. Accordingly, we cannot agree with Yousefi that, under the circumstances, due process prevents the application of IIRIRA § 309(c)(4)(G), in the present case. Cf. id. at 856-57 (suggesting that the alien had received “perhaps more” process than was due where an Article III court, in addition to an immigration judge and the Board of Immigration Appeals, had determined that the underlying offense on its face rendered him deportable).
Nevertheless, we conclude it is the language of IIRIRA § 309(c)(4)(G) itself, rather than due process, that precludes the jurisdictional bar from applying in this case. In our view, Congress stripped us of jurisdiction only if the alien’s aggravated felony was actually the basis, or one of the bases, of the final order of deportation. The provision stating that “there shall be no appeal permitted in the case of an alien who is inadmissible or deportable by reason of having committed [an enumerated] criminal offense,” IIRIRA § 309(c)(4)(G), applies to final orders of deportation. Thus, we read the text to mean that there shall be no appeal from a final order which directs that an alien be deported because he committed an aggravated felony or another offense enumerated in section 309(c)(4)(G).
The First Circuit Court of Appeals considered a similar jurisdiction-stripping provision contained in the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), Pub.L. No. 104-132, 110 Stat. 1214, and reached the same conclusion we do. See Choeum v. INS, 129 F.3d 29, 38 (1st Cir.1997). We find that court’s reasoning persuasive:
According to the INS, for purposes of jurisdiction, aliens “deporta&ie by reason of’ having committed firearms offenses are not only those aliens who have been ordered deported for firearms offenses, but also those aliens who could be deported for that reason. As a matter of statutory construction, that argument is somewhat illogical: The contested phrase comes from Section 440(a) of AEDPA, a statutory section concerned with final orders of deportation. The section therefore applies, by its very terms, only to aliens who have actually been adjudged deportable. It is therefore highly doubtful that, in that context, Congress meant “deportable by reason of’ to mean, as the INS would have it, “potentially susceptible to being deported by reason of....”
Id. at 38; see also Xiong v. INS, 173 F.3d 601, 608 (7th Cir.1999).
The Service argues that as long as Yousefi committed a crime that qualifies as an. “aggravated felony,” judicial review is cut off regardless of whether the final order charged Yousefi with deportability based on his status as an aggravated felon. Like the First Circuit, we reject the premise of this reading of the statute — that if an alien is potentially removable based on one of the crimes enumerated in IIRIRA -§ 309(c)(4)(G), then the jurisdictional bar applies. We recognize there is authority to the contrary. See Lopez-Elias v. Reno, 209 F.3d 788, 793 (5th Cir.2000), cert. denied, 531 U.S. 1069, 121 S.Ct. 757, 148 L.Ed.2d 660 (2001); Abdel-Razek v. INS, 114 F.3d 831, 832 (9th Cir.1997). However, these decisions do not explicitly parse the language of the statute. Accordingly, we are inclined to agree with Choeum. We conclude that the jurisdictional bar of the transitional rules does not apply in this case.
III.
Turning to the merits of Yousefi’s appeal, we first consider Yousefi’s argument that the Board erroneously concluded that his convictions qualified as crimes of moral turpitude and therefore rendered him deportable. When reviewing an agency determination, . federal courts accord substantial deference to the agency’s interpretation of the statutes and regulations that it administers. See INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 448, 107 S.Ct. 1207, 94 L.Ed.2d 434 (1987). Thus, we give “due deference to the [Board’s] interpretation of the deportation statute,” Cabral v. INS, 15 F.3d 193, 194 (1st Cir.1994), provided it is “ ‘based on a permissible construction of the statute.’ ” Akindemowo v. INS, 61 F.3d 282, 284 (4th Cir.1995) (quoting Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 467 U.S. 837, 843, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984)). The Chevron framework provides the appropriate method for analyzing the Board’s determination of what type of conduct involves moral turpitude for purposes of the INA. See Michel v. INS, 206 F.3d 253, 262 (2d Cir.2000); Franklin v. INS, 72 F.3d 571, 572 (8th Cir.1995); Cabral, 15 F.3d at 194. But see Franklin, 72 F.3d at 575-80 (Bennett, J., dissenting) (noting apparent circuit split). Congress did not define “crime involving moral turpitude,” leaving the phrase to administrative and judicial interpretation. See Cabral, 15 F.3d at 195. Thus, under Chevron we must defer to the Board’s decision provided the interpretation “is not an unreasonable one.” Lewis, 194 F.3d at 544.
We conclude that the Board’s determination was reasonable. Since Yousefi admitted the underlying convictions, our task is simply to look to the offense of conviction to determine if it qualifies as a “crime of moral turpitude.” The Board decided that all three of Yousefi’s predicate crimes qualified as crimes of moral turpitude.
First, we agree with the Service that Yousefi has technically waived his argument that the Board erred in its determination that he is deportable for having committed a crime of moral turpitude within five years of entry into the United States, namely hi

[truncated for spike corpus]