Case: Lenning v. Commercial Union Insurance
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Date: 2001-08-07
Citation: 260 F.3d 574
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 9497481

OPINION
CLAY, Circuit Judge.
Plaintiff, Sandra Lenning, appeals the district court’s order granting summary-judgment in favor of Defendant Commercial Union Insurance Company in this diversity action alleging breach of a homeowner’s insurance policy and violation of Kentucky consumer protection and insurance statutes. The district court determined that Defendant did not breach the terms of the policy and did not act in bad faith by denying Plaintiff a legal defense against a lawsuit filed against her. The district court further held that Defendant did not violate the Kentucky statutes. We now AFFIRM.
I.
The following account of the facts is adopted from the district court opinion.
Plaintiff is employed by PNC Bank as a Vice President in its private client group, a position she describes as a lender. Plaintiffs fiancé, Ed Gatterdam, has worked as a general contractor for residential homes. His own construction business ended with his personal bankruptcy in 1990. In 1996, Plaintiff and Gatterdam agreed to build six homes, using the profits from the sale of each home to finance construction of the next home. According to their plan, Plaintiff would obtain a construction loan to finance the building of each house. Gat-terdam would then serve as construction manager and receive a fee paid by Plaintiff. The couple hoped that their plan would generate enough money so that they could retire to Florida. However, Plaintiff now claims that when she purchased the first lot in June of 1996, she intended to build a home for use as her personal residence.
Sale of the Home
The first house on which Plaintiff and Gatterdam collaborated was built at 6708 Timber Ridge in Prospect, Kentucky. When Gatterdam began clearing the lot and pouring the house’s concrete foundation, he erected a sign that read, “E & G Associates — will build to suit.” The sign also included Gatterdam’s home telephone number, which was assigned to the apartment he shared with Plaintiff. Shortly after Gatterdam poured the foundation, Dennis Tapp, an interior decorator who lived nearby, contacted Plaintiff and Gat-terdam by telephone and expressed his interest in purchasing the as yet unbuilt house. Plaintiff believes that Tapp contacted them after seeing the phone number on the sign. Tapp met with Plaintiff and Gatterdam on a Saturday morning to review the house’s plans and to suggest design changes. On August 14, 1996, Plaintiff, Gatterdam, and Tapp signed a document titled “Tri-Party Construction Contract,” under which Tapp agreed to purchase the home from Plaintiff for $196,000 upon completion.
Although Tapp was the home buyer, Plaintiff obtained the construction loan necessary to finance the building of the house. She personally paid subcontractors and obtained all necessary building licenses and permits. Plaintiff and Gatterdam jointly sent a letter to one subcontractor expressing their displeasure with the installation of the home’s “DRYVIT” outer covering. In addition the two jointly signed all change orders. Although the term “Seller” appeared beneath Plaintiffs signature on the change orders, the forms bore the heading “S. Lenning/E. Gatter-dam, Bldr.” The parties closed on the contract on January 30, 1997, with Plaintiff conveying the property to Tapp by a general warranty deed at a profit of over $ 30,000. Plaintiff never moved into or spent a night at the house.
The Homeowner’s Insurance Policy
After purchasing the lot, but before entering the contract with Tapp, Plaintiff obtained a custom homeowner’s insurance policy (the “policy”) written by the Commercial Union Insurance Company (“CUIC”) through an independent agent, the Langan Company (“Langan”). The policy purchased by Plaintiff includes a section entitled “SECTION II-LIABILITY COVERAGES”, which sets forth the terms for coverage, including a legal defense for personal liability lawsuits:
COVERAGE E-Personal Liability
If a claim is made or a suit is brought against an “insured” for damages because of “bodily injury” or “property damage” caused by an “occurrence” to which this coverage applies, we will:
1. Pay up to our limit of liability for the damages for which the “insured” is legally liable. Damages include prejudgment interest awarded against the “insured”; and
2. Provide a defense at our expense by counsel of our choice, even if the suit is groundless, false or fraudulent. We may investigate and settle any claim or suit that we decide is appropriate. Our duty to settle or defend ends when the amount we pay for damages resulting from the “occurrence” equals our limit of liability.
(Policy p. 10, J.A. at 215.) According to the “DEFINITIONS” section of the policy,
5. “Occurrence” means an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful conditions, which results, during the policy period, in:
a. “Bodily injury”; or
b. “Property damage”.
(Policy p. 1, J.A. at 206.) Another section of the policy, “SECTION II-EXCLUSIONS”, excludes certain types of claims from personal liability coverage:
1. Coverage E — Personal Liability and Coverage F — Medical Payments to Others do not apply to “bodily injury” or “property damage”:
a. Which is expected or intended by the “insured”;
b. Arising out of or in connection with a “business” engaged in by an “insured”. This exclusion applies but is not limited to an act or omission, regardless of its nature or circumstance, involving a service or duty rendered, promised, owed, or implied to be provided because of the nature of the “business”;
d. Arising out of the rendering of or failure to render professional services;
e. Arising out of a premises:
(1) owned by an “insured”
2. Coverage E-Personal Liability, does not apply to:
b. “Property damage” to property owned by the “insured”....
(Policy p. 11, J.A. at 216.)
The policy names only Plaintiff as an insured party. Langan agent Tom Barrett testified at his deposition that at the time Plaintiff purchased the policy, he believed she intended to use the Timber Ridge home as her personal residence. Yet, neither Plaintiff nor Gatterdam informed Barrett or any other Langan agent that they had entered into a tri-party contract with Tapp or that the house had been sold prior to its completion. Because the homeowner’s policy included a builder’s risk endorsement which would expire upon the completion of construction, Langan agents periodically contacted Plaintiff or Gatterdam to ascertain the building’s progress. Langan’s activity log for Plaintiffs account indicates that on January 15, 1997, five months after the tri-party contract was executed and two weeks prior to closing, Plaintiff informed a Langan agent that she would close on the home within a few weeks and would advise the company when she moved into the house.
The Tapp Lawsuit
On February 9, 1998, Tapp sued Plaintiff and Gatterdam in Jefferson County, Kentucky, Circuit Court. Plaintiff submitted a copy of Tapp’s complaint and the triparty contract to Langan for forwarding to CUIC. Although he forwarded the documents to CUIC, Langan agent Tom Barrett advised Plaintiff that the policy did not appear to cover her claim. On February 25, 1998, a CUIC supervisor, Ken Schwartz, sent a handwritten note to senior claims representative Karen Lasch. The note informed Lasch of the Tapp lawsuit and alerted her to a “possible exclusion for business operation unless this is an occasional operation/occupation.” Lasch attempted to telephone Plaintiff that day, but reached only Gatterdam. The following morning, Lasch again telephoned Plaintiff and obtained her permission to record their conversation. During the conversation, Plaintiff volunteered the fact that she and Gatterdam had originally intended to build a house and then sell it.
On March 2, 1998, CUIC informed Plaintiff that it reserved all rights and defenses under the policy, including its right to pursue a judicial determination that no coverage existed under the policy. On March 26, 1998, Plaintiffs attorney mailed to Lasch several documents relating to Tapp’s lawsuit. Plaintiffs attorney requested that CUIC inform him whether it intended to defend Plaintiff in the Tapp litigation. On April 17, 1998, Lasch sent a letter to Plaintiff explaining that CUIC would deny a defense for the Tapp lawsuit for two reasons. First, CUIC characterized Tapp’s claims as based upon breach of contract, breach of express and implied warranties, and slander of title. CUIC determined that none of these claims qualified as an “occurrence,” as defined in the policy, but rather they were business risks assumed by Plaintiff. Second, CUIC explained that even if Tapp’s complaint stated a negligence claim for property damage, the policy excluded coverage due to the business risk exclusion.
Lawsuit Against CUIC
On February 18, 1999, ten months after CUIC issued its letter denying a defense, Plaintiff filed a “Petition for Declaration of Rights” in the Jefferson County, Kentucky, Circuit Court. Plaintiff alleged therein that CUIC’s denial of a legal defense breached the terms of her homeowner’s insurance policy and constituted bad faith, as well as a violation of Kentucky consumer protection and insurance statutes. After removal to federal court on the basis of diversity jurisdiction, both parties filed motions for summary judgment. On February 17, 2000, the district court issued a Memorandum Opinion and Order granting Defendant CUIC’s motion for summary judgment and dismissing the action with prejudice. The district court determined that CUIC had no duty to defend Plaintiff against the Tapp lawsuit because the Tapp complaint did not allege an “occurrence” within the meaning of the policy; Plaintiff was engaged in a business pursuit not covered by the policy by virtue of the business exclusion clause; any liability for damage to the property while Plaintiff owned it is not covered by the express terms of the policy; and any damage to the property after it was sold to Tapp was not covered because such a claim would have arisen after the policy period ended. The district court also granted summary judgment to CUIC with respect to Plaintiffs Kentucky statutory claims. Plaintiff filed a timely notice of appeal.
II.
This Court reviews a grant of summary judgment de novo using the same legal standard applied by the district court; however, we review the denial of a summary judgment motion only for abuse of discretion. Wiley v. United States, 20 F.3d 222, 224 (6th Cir.1994). Summary judgment is appropriate where “the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 (1986); Booker v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Co., Inc., 879 F.2d 1304, 1310 (6th Cir.1989). Not all facts are considered material; a fact is only material if its resolution will affect the outcome of the lawsuit. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986). When reviewing cross-motions for summary judgment, the court must evaluate each motion on its own merits and view all facts and inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Matsushita Elec. Ind. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S.Ct. 1348, 89 L.Ed.2d 538 (1986); Taft Broad. Co. v. United States, 929 F.2d 240, 248 (6th Cir.1991).
III.
A. Duty to Defend
Under Kentucky law, in order to recover in any action based on breach of a contract, a plaintiff must show the existence and the breach of a contractually imposed duty. Strong v. Louisville & Nashville R. Co., 240 Ky. 781, 43 S.W.2d 11, 13 (1931). The terms of Plaintiffs policy provided that CUIC had a duty to defend her against lawsuits that could be covered by the policy. Plaintiff contends that CUIC breached its duty to defend insofar as the allegations in the Tapp complaint were sufficient to require a judicial determination prior to denying coverage. We disagree.
Kentucky courts have recognized that the duty to defend is broader than the duty to indemnify. See James Graham Brown Found., Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 814 S.W.2d 273, 280 (Ky.1991). Insurers have an obligation to defend if there is an allegation “which potentially, possibly or might come within the coverage of the policy.” Brown Found., 814 S.W.2d at 279 (citing O’Bannon v. Aetna Cas. and Sur. Co., 678 S.W.2d 390 (Ky.1984)); cf. Matheny v. Ludwig, 742 So.2d 1029 (La.Ct.App.1999) (holding that the insurer is obligated to defend unless the complaint unambiguously excludes coverage). Therefore, even if an insurance company denies coverage based on the mistaken belief that it is justified in doing so, the company may still breach its contract with the insured. See Eskridge v. Educator & Executive Insurers, Inc., 677 S.W.2d 887, 889 (Ky.1984). However, in the instant case, there was no potential for coverage under the policy. “The determination of whether a defense is required must be made at the outset of the litigation” by reference to the complaint and known facts. Brown Found., 814 S.W.2d at 279 (citing Knapp v. Chevron USA, Inc., 781 F.2d 1123 (5th Cir.1986)). Tapp’s complaint did not allege the type of claims that would be covered by the policy. In addition, the language of the complaint reveals that any potential coverage was abrogated by two explicit coverage exclusions.
1. The “Occurrence” Requirement
Tapp’s complaint alleged that the Timber Ridge home was built with poor workmanship and that he was forced to finish construction at his own expense. Specifically, Tapp alleged that:
The Defendants breached the Contract by negligently constructing a house for the Plaintiff which was not in conformity with the Contract and applicable plans, specifications and standards.
(Tapp Complaint, J.A. at 164.) Tapp also claimed that Plaintiff and Gatterdam improperly filed a mechanic’s lien against the property and fraudulently misrepresented their construction practices. Plaintiff disputes CUIC’s conclusion that the complaint alleged a negligent breach of contract. Instead, she characterizes the complaint as alleging negligence apart from breach of contract. Plaintiff contends that CUIC drew an unwarranted conclusion that the allegations in thé complaint unambiguously excluded coverage; she argues that the complaint revealed a possibility of liability under the policy. In support of this contention, Plaintiff claims that CUIC admitted through its senior claims adjuster Lasch that the Tapp complaint was “vague” and “poorly worded” and that it is possible that the Tapp suit could have come within the terms of the policy. Therefore, she contends, CUIC should have conducted a more thorough investigation to determine if such coverage was possible. However, even a liberal construction of the complaint would not support Plaintiffs arguments.
First, insofar as the complaint asserted liability for negligence, it cannot be said to allege an “occurrence” under the policy. Plaintiffs policy covers “bodily injury” and “property damage”, the latter of which is defined as “physical injury to, destruction of, or loss of use of tangible property.” Plaintiff contends that this definition encompasses physical damage to the home as well as associated loss of the damaged portions of the home that may be included in Tapp’s lawsuit. Yet, Tapp has not alleged any damage to, destruction of, or loss of the use of property. Furthermore, Tapp has not alleged any bodily injury. Instead, he merely claims that he was forced, at tremendous expense, to complete the construction job that Plaintiff and Gatterdam had left unfinished. Courts in other states have held that such a purely economic claim cannot constitute an “occurrence.” See, e.g., Yegge v. Integrity Mut. Ins. Co., 534 N.W.2d 100, 102 (Iowa 1995) (homeowners’ intangib

[truncated for spike corpus]