Case: McAvey v. Chen-Horng Lee
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Date: 2001-07-25
Citation: 260 F.3d 359
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 9496935

DENNIS, Circuit Judge:
William J. McAvey brought this diversity action against Chen-Horng Lee (Mr. Lee), his wifé, Chin-Li Lee (Mrs. Lee), and Ming Chun, Inc. d/b/a Tomfort Lodge (“Ming Chun”) (collectively, “the insureds” or “the innkeepers”), and First Financial Insurance Company (“First Financial”), the insureds’ commercial liability insurer, for damages for personal injury to McAvey caused by the negligence of the insureds and their employees in failing to take reasonable precautions and to exercise proper vigilance for the safety and security of their hotel guests. McAvey alleged that he fractured his heel while chasing two unidentified robbers who had taken his wallet by force in his Tomfort Lodge motel room. He further averred that the criminals entered the motel and the hall outside his room without detection by the motel employees, tricked him into opening his door, committed the robbery, and escaped without being identified or detained, because of the defendants’ inadequate motel security and safety precautions and the negligence of the motel clerk in failing to exercise reasonable efforts to monitor and protect hotel guests against such dangers. At the close of the plaintiffs case at trial, the district court entered a judgment as a matter of law (“JMOL”) dismissing the action against Mr. and Mrs. Lee. After completion of the trial, the jury returned a verdict in favor of McAvey, fixing damages and apportioning fault between him and the innkeepers. The district court rendered a judgment in McAvey’s favor against First Financial.
First Financial appealed, contending, inter alia, that its policy excluded coverage for bodily injuries arising from assault or battery; that all of McAvey’s injuries arose from a battery by the robbers; that the dismissal of the suit against two of First Financial’s insureds, Mr. and Mrs. Lee, and the plaintiffs failure to properly serve the third insured, Ming Chun, effectively extinguished the plaintiffs right to a direct action and judgment against the insurer; and that the district court erred in not instructing the jury to determiné whether the fault of the unidentified criminals was a legal cause of McAvey’s injuries, and, if so, to apportion a share of the fault and liability to them.
I.
McAvey, a truck driver, arrived in New Orleans, Louisiana, oh the evening of November 6, 1995, with a load of household goods to be delivered the next morning. McAvey checked into the Tomfort Lodge, a modestly priced motel on Tulane Avenue.
Mr. and Mrs. Lee had purchased the building in which the Tomfort Lodge was located in 1988, and Mr. Lee had managed a motel business in the building from 1988 to 1995. At some point prior to 1993, the motel business was taken over by Ming Chun, Inc. (“Ming Chun”). The Lees leased the building to Ming Chun for minimum and percentage-of-profits rentals, pursuant to an oral agreement. In 1995, the Lees and Ming Chun signed a written lease formalizing their existing oral lease agreement. Mr. Lee continued to manage the motel business for Ming Chun.
According to McAvey, he was awakened around 11 p.m. the night of his stay at the Tomfort Lodge by a man who knocked on the door and announced himself as “motel security.” When McAvey opened the door, two men forced their way in and hurled him onto the bed. As McAvey struggled with one assailant; the other grabbed McAvey’s wallet and ran. McA-vey pursued the robber outside the room and down the motel stairs. During .the chase, the second robber made contact with McAvey as he passed McAvey on the stairs; McAvey’s bare right heel landed on the edge of one of the steps, fracturing his heel bone.
McAvey filed suit in district court initially only against Mr. Lee. First Financial, the innkeepers’ commercial liability insurer, refused to defend the claim against Mr. Lee on the ground that McAvey’s claim arose from a battery, a risk it alleged was excluded from coverage under the policy. McAvey added Mrs. Lee as a defendant in his First Amended Complaint, and added Ming Chun and First Financial as defendants in his Second Amended Complaint.
First Financial moved for summary judgment on the basis that 'McAvey’s loss arose from a battery, which it claimed was excluded from coverage by the policy. On November 20, 1997, the district court denied the insurer’s motion, holding that the documents constituting the insurance contract were ambiguous as to whether an assault and battery exclusion had been incorporated by reference and therefore must be construed in favor of coverage. On August 8, 1998, for the same reasons, the district court granted Mr. and Mrs. Lee’s motion for'a partial summary judgment, decreeing that the policy did not include an assault and battery exclusion.
During trial, after McAvey rested his case-in-chief, the Lees’ attorney, James Swanson, moved orally for a JMOL to dismiss the action against the Lees on the ground that “[tjhere is no evidence ... that Mr. Lee did anything that was unreasonable under the circumstances. The evidence seems to be that at worse the desk clerk should have done something and he wasn’t Mr. Lee’s employee, he was the corporation’s employee.” The district court granted JMOL dismissing the action against the Lees “for the reasons argued by the plaintiff [sic].” Evidently, the district court meant “for the reasons argued by the defendants’ attorney, Mr. Swanson.” After the defendants presented their case-in-chief, First Financial moved for dismissal of Ming Chun on the grounds that the corporation had not been properly served pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 4. After that motion was denied, First Financial moved for a JMOL pursuant to Rule 50(a)(2) to dismiss McAvey’s suit on the grounds that Louisiana’s direct action statute did not permit the maintenance of a direct action against an insurer when the insureds were no longer parties to-the action, arguing that the Lees had been dismissed - and Ming Chun, the only other insured, had not been properly served. The district court denied the motion and, after closing arguments and instructions, submitted the case to the jury.
The jury returned a verdict finding that the negligence of the innkeeper and McA-vey were legal causes of McAvey’s injury, charging the insureds with eighty percent of the fault and McAvey with twenty percent. The district court entered final judgment against First Financial as insurer of Ming Chun, awarding McAvey a net sum of $301,600 in damages after discounting his recovery by his apportioned fault. First Financial’s motions for a JMOL and a new trial were denied. First Financial appealed from the district court’s final judgment. McAvey appealed from the JMOL dismissing his action against the Lees. Mr. and Mrs. Lee appealed from evidentiary and legal rulings made during the trial and the final judgment. After appellate briefs had been filed, however, McAvey and the Lees settled the dispute between them. Upon a joint motion by McAvey and the Lees, their appeals were dismissed by order of the Clerk of Court on July 21,1999.
II.
A.
First Financial contends that the policy for 1995, the applicable policy year, excluded coverage for losses arising from assault or battery; and that McAvey’s injuries resulted from a battery. We conclude, however, that (1) the policy did not exclude coverage for such losses and, (2) therefore, whether McAvey’s injuries arose from a battery is irrelevant to determination of the insurer’s liability. This coverage issue was raised by Mr. and Mrs. Lee’s partial motion for summary judgment, which the district court granted, and First Financial’s motion for summary judgment, which was denied by the trial court.
“The general standard that an appellate court applies in reviewing the grant or denial of a summary-judgment motion is the same as that employed by the trial court initially under Rule 56(c)-a summary judgment is proper when it appears ‘that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.’ ” 10A CHARLES ALAN WRIGHT, ÁRTHUR R. MILLER, & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Prooedure: Civil 3d. § 2716 (1998) (quoting Fed.R.CivP. 56(c)) (citing, inter alia, GATX Aircraft Corp. v. M/V Courtney Leigh, 768 F.2d 711 (5th Cir.1985); McCrae v. Hankins, 720 F.2d 863 (5th Cir.1983)). “[O]n summary judgment the inferences to be drawn from the underlying facts contained in such materials [such as affidavits, depositions, and exhibits] must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.” United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 655, 82 act. 993, 8 L.Ed.2d 176 (1962). “[W]e look at the record on summary judgment in the light most favorable to ... the party opposing the motion....” Poller v. Columbia Broad. Sys., Inc., 368 U.S. 464, 473, 82 S.Ct. 486, 7 L.Ed.2d 458 (1962); see also John v. La. Bd. of Trustees, 757 F.2d 698 (5th Cir.1985); Simon v. United States, 711 F.2d 740 (5th Cir.1983).
The record contains numerous documents pertaining to contracts of commercial general liability insurance between First Financial and Ming Chun. First Financial issued one new policy and two renewal policies for the annual policy periods commencing in 1993, 1994, and 1995, insuring Ming Chun against liability in connection with the motel business and property: (1) First Financial New Policy No. F0070G400045; Named Insured: Ming Chun, Inc., DBA Carib Motel, 4025 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, La. 70119; Policy period: April 25, 1993 to April 26, 1994 (hereinafter “1993 policy”); (2) First Financial Renewal Policy No. F0070G400045 Rl; Named Insured:' Ming Chun, DBA Comfort Lodge, 4025 Tulane Ave., New Orleans, La. 70119; Policy period: April 26, 1994 to April 26, 1995 (hereinafter “1994 policy”); (3) First Financial Renewal Policy No. F0070G400045 R-2; Named Insured: Ming Chun, DBA Tom-fort Lodge, 4025 Tulané Ave., New Orleans, La. 70119;' Policy period: April 26, 1995 to April 26, 1996 (hereinafter “1995 policy”).
Each policy incorporated and/or deleted by reference other documents, forms, and endorsements governing various aspects of coverage. The policies referred to the separate documents by company form numbers. Consequently, the contours of coverage of. each policy cannot be determined without laboriously tracking down each pertinent document incorporated or deleted by reference among the numerous documents, forms, and endorsements in the record.
The 1993 policy, in pertinent part, provided: “Form(s) and Endorsement(s) made a part , of this policy at time of issue: ;.. CL150(ll/85)[.]” (footnote and other forms listed omitted). That form, entitled “General Commercial Liability Coverage Part Declarations,” filed of record with the 1993 policy, in pertinent part provides: “Forms and Endorsements applying to this Coverage Part and made part of this policy at time of issue: ... BG-2CW(9/92)[.]” (numerous others omitted). “BG-2-CW(9/92) (Intermediate .Form)” contains exclusion BG-G-042 492 entitled “Exclusion-Assault Or Battery,” which provides:
Exclusion (a) of Coverage A (Section 1) is replaced by the following: a. “bodily injury,” “property damage,” or “personal injury”:' (1) Expected or intended from the standpoint of any insured; or (2) Arising out of assault or battery, or out of any act or omission in connection with the prevention or suppression of an assault or battery. ■
The replaced Exclusion (a) provides: “This insurance does not. apply to: a. ‘Bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’ expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured. This exclusion does not apply to ‘bodily injury’ resulting from the use of reasonable force to protect persons or property.” Thus, the 1993 policy plainly excluded coverage of bodily and personal injury and property damage arising out of assault or battery.
The 1995 policy in effect at the time of McAvey’s injury, however, failed to continue or re-adopt the assault or battery exclusion. The 1995 policy, in pertinent part, provides:
In consideration of the payment of the premium, it is agreed that the Policy designated herein is renewed for the period stated, subject to all its terms unless otherwise specified below.
RENEWAL TERMS:
... In consideration of our continuing coverage and the premium charged, you understand and agree that the following forms changes are made and apply, or no longer apply, as the case may be, to coverage provided by this policy.
These forms are deleted and no longer apply: FIF(4/89) Revised 5/92; BG-I-05K4/92); CG0001(ll/88); CG0300G1/85); CG2244(ll/85)
These forms are added and apply: FIF(4/89) Revised 6/94; BG-1-015(2/94); CG0001(10/93); CG0300G0/93); CG2244(10/93)
Form CG0001(10/93), the Commercial General Liability Coverage Form filed of record with the 1995 policy, provides in pertinent part: “2. Exclusions. This insurance does not apply to: a. Expected or Intended Injury[:] ‘Bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’ expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured. This exclusion does not apply to ‘bodily injury’ resulting from the use of reasonable force to protect persons or property.”
But the foregoing quoted 1995 policy provisions clearly deleted and made inapplicable Form CG0001(ll/88), the original Commercial General Liability Coverage Form, which had been amended by the “BG-2-CW(9/92) (Intermediate Form)” that contained the BG-G-042 492 assault or battery exclusion. The 1995 policy contains only the much narrower exclusion of injury or damage expected or intended by the insured, unless resulting from use of reasonable force to protect persons or property. Consequently, it is evident that the 1995 policy did not continue or readopt the assault or battery exclusion. Thus, McAvey’s injuries arising out of assault or battery are not excluded from coverage under the 1995 policy.
Furthermore, assuming arguendo that it is reasonable to interpret the insurance documents as First Financial proposes, viz., that the parties’ unexpressed intention was that the 1993 assault and battery exclusion would .affect all future contracts unless expressly abrogated, that would only provide an alternative reading of an ambiguous contract. We have recognized that Louisiana courts have required that insurance policy ambiguities be resolved in favor of coverage of the insured. Huey T. Littleton Claims, Inc. v. Employers Reinsurance Corp., 933 F.2d 337, 340 (5th Cir.1991) (citing Benton Casing Serv., Inc. v. Avemco Ins. Co., 379 So.2d 225 (La.1979); Stewart v. La. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 420 So.2d 1217 (La.Ct.App.3d Cir.1982)); accord La. Civ.Code Ann. art. 2056 (West 2000) (“In case of doubt that cannot be otherwise resolved, a provision in a contract must be interpreted against the party who furnished its text. A. contract executed in a standard form of one party must be interpreted, in case of doubt, in favor of the other party.”); Crabtree v. State Farm Ins. Co., 632 So.2d 736, 741 (La.1994) (“If after applying the other general rules of construction an ambiguity remains, the ambiguous contractual provision is to be construed against the insurer whq issued the policy and in favor of the insured.”). Accordingly, even if we accept First Financial’s contractual interpretation as a reasonable choice, we are constitutionally required, as Erie held, to apply Louisiana law, which here mandates that we resolve the ambiguity by adopting the other reasonable interpretation that favors coverage for the benefit of the insured.
B.
First Financial next argues that the district court erred in rendering judgment against the insurer alone, because Louisiana’s direct action statute, La.Rev.Stat. Ann, § 22:655 (West 2000), provides that “such action may be brought against the insurer alone only when” the insured is deceased, insolvent, unable to be served, engaged in bankruptcy proceedings, or a spouse, child, or parent of the plaintiff, and none of these exceptions applies in the present case. Id. § 655(B)(l)(a)-(e). In the absence of 

[truncated for spike corpus]