Case: Saldana v. Kmart Corp.
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
Date: 2001-07-23
Citation: 260 F.3d 228
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 9496713

OPINION OF THE COURT
BARRY, Circuit Judge.
This case arises from a slip-and-fall suffered by Marie Saldana at a Kmart store on St. Croix. Ms. Saldana appeals the grant of summary judgment against her while her attorney, Lee Rohn, Esq., appeals the imposition of sanctions against her for her out-of-court vulgar language in a handful of cases, including this one. The tortuous procedural history that has led to the consolidation of a slip in a puddle of car wax with sanctions for vulgar language need not detain us. Suffice it to say that we have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. S 1291 and will affirm the District Court’s December 20, 1999 decision with respect to Saldana, but will reverse with respect to Rohn.
I.
Marie Saldana alleged in her complaint that she slipped in a puddle of car wax in a Kmart aisle on April 20, 1995 and suffered injury. No one saw the wax before Salda-na fell, no one else slipped in the puddle, and Saldana did not see tracks of wax near the puddle that might indicate someone else had stepped in the spill. Saldana stated that after she fell, she noticed that the puddle measured 24 inches across and was covered with a layer of light brown dust. A Kmart employee, Eugenie Williams, had walked down the same aisle less than three minutes prior to Saldana’s fall and saw no wax on the floor at that time. After Saldana fell, Williams spotted an unbroken, completely empty bottle of wax on the floor with its top off.
Kmart brought a motion for summary judgment. In response, Saldana offered no evidence that any Kmart representative knew of the spill. Rather, she attempted to show constructive notice through the expert testimony of Rosie Mackay, proffered as a safety engineer, and her own testimony regarding the dust on the puddle. Saldana offered two reports by Mac-kay: an initial report dated January 1997, and a supplemental report dated April 1997. In the January report, Mackay concluded that “K-Mart was negligent in that there was a spill, and it was not cleaned up. Ms. Saldana was the unfortunate victim of this act of poor housekeeping....” App. at 361. Mackay based this conclusion in part on safety regulations promulgated pursuant to the Occupational Safety and Health Act (“OSHA”). Mackay’s April report detailed the results of “pouring tests” she conducted to determine the length of time it would take for the same brand of wax to escape from an inverted bottle and form a 12-inch puddle on her kitchen floor. At her deposition, Mackay discussed additional experiments carried out in June 1997 involving open bottles lying on their sides. The District Court found Mackay’s opinions and tests to be “irrelevant under Rule 402, ... confusing or misleading under Rule 403, and ... technically (scientifically) unreliable under Rule 702.” Saldana v. Kmart, 84 F.Supp.2d 629, 636 (D.Vi.1999). The Court also found that any observation of dust on the puddle after Saldana’s fall was not relevant to the state of the wax before the fall. Id. Thus, the Court granted Kmart’s motion for summary judgment.
When reviewing an order granting summary judgment, we exercise plenary review and apply the same test a district court applies. Armbruster v. Unisys Corp., 32 F.3d 768, 777 (3d Cir.1994). “Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c), that test is whether there is a genuine issue of material fact and, if not, whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Id. (quoting Gray v. York Newspapers, Inc., 957 F.2d 1070, 1078 (3d Cir.1992)). “In so deciding, a court must view the facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and draw all inferences in that party’s favor.” Id. A court should find for the moving party “if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986). The party opposing summary judgment “may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of the ... pleading”; its response, “by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.” Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(e); Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 106 S.Ct. 1348, 89 L.Ed.2d 538 (1986). “[T]here is no issue for trial unless there is sufficient evidence favoring the nonmoving party for a jury to return a verdict for that party.” Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249, 106 S.Ct. 2505. “Such affirmative evidence — regardless of whether it is direct or circumstantial— must amount to more than a scintilla, but may amount to less (in the evaluation of the court) than a preponderance.” Williams v. Borough of West Chester, 891 F.2d 458, 460-61 (3d Cir.1989).
Because Saldana does not allege actual notice on the part of Kmart, she would ultimately be required to show that the wax was “on the floor long enough to give [Kmart] constructive notice of this potential ‘unreasonable risk of harm.’ ” David v. Pueblo Supermarket, 740 F.2d 230, 234 (3d Cir.1984) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts S 343 (1965)). Although it is uncontested that the wax was on the floor at the time of the fall, “the mere presence of the foreign substance does not establish whether it had been there a few seconds, a few minutes, a few hours or even a few days before the accident.” Id. Circumstantial evidence that a substance was left on the floor for an inordinate period of time can be enough to constitute negligence; where a plaintiff points to such evidence, it is a question of fact for the jury whether, under all the circumstances, the defective condition of the floor existed long enough so that it would have been discovered with the exercise of reasonable care. Id. at 236. Put another way, Saldana must point to evidence that would allow the jury to infer that the wax was on Kmart’s floor for some minimum amount of time before the accident. Only then could a jury begin to consider whether under the circumstances the amount of time indicated by the evidence establishes constructive notice.
To show that the wax was on Kmart’s floor an unreasonable length of time, Sal-dana relied chiefly on the information submitted by her expert, Rosie Mackay. As the District Court noted, Federal Rule of Evidence 702 imposes three major requirements as to expert opinions: (1) the witness must be an expert; (2) the procedures and methods used must be rehable; and (3) the testimony must “fit” the factual dispute at issue so that it will assist the jury. See Kumho Tire v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137, 149-50, 119 S.Ct. 1167, 143 L.Ed.2d 238 (1999); Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharms., 509 U.S. 579, 590-93, 113 S.Ct. 2786, 125 L.Ed.2d 469 (1993); United States v. Downing, 753 F.2d 1224, 1242 (3d Cir.1985). Even if the evidence offered by the expert witness satisfies Rule 702, it may still be excluded if its “probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.” Fed. R. of Evid. 403.
We will assume arguendo, as did the District Court, that Mackay meets the requirements of an “expert.” Even so, Mackay’s reports and conclusions would not be admissible. In her January report, Mackay concluded that, although Kmart purports to follow safety procedures similar to certain OSHA regulations, “K-Mart was negligent in that there was a spill, and it was not cleaned up.” App. at 361. Kmart “allowed” the wax to spill, Mackay wrote, and therefore “failed to use good, logical, prudent safety precautions.” App. at 362. These conclusory statements essentially attempt to force upon Kmart a strict liability standard based on Mackay’s reading of OSHA, a regulatory scheme far different from the applicable law described above. To be sure, in Rolick v. Collins Pine Co., 975 F.2d 1009 (3d Cir.1992), this Court found admissible an expert’s opinion that the defendant violated OSHA standards. Id. at 1014. That case, however, applied Pennsylvania law, and we noted that Pennsylvania courts had previously borrowed OSHA regulations for use as evidence of the standard of care owed to plaintiffs. Id.
This case is guided by the Restatement of Torts, which governs in the Virgin Islands in the absence of a local statute. 1 V.I.C. S 4. Under the Restatement, “[t]he court will not adopt as the standard of conduct of a reasonable man the requirements of a legislative enactment or an administrative regulation whose purpose is found to be exclusively ... to protect a class of persons other than the one whose interests are invaded.” Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 288; see also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 286, Illust. 1 (safety statute for protection of employees does not define standard of care owed to business invitee). As we have stated, Kmart is liable in this negligence action only if it knew or should have known of the dangerous condition but failed to take reasonable steps to correct it. David, 740 F.2d at 234. Thus, Mackay’s opinion that Kmart violated worker safety requirements would not assist the fact finder in deciding whether Kmart unreasonably failed to detect a wax spill that injured a business invitee. Mackay’s April report includes similar conclusory statements that the District Court properly found would not be admissible at trial.
Mackay’s April pour tests indicated that, depending on the technique used, a bottle of the wax at issue would take almost three minutes to empty and an additional five minutes to form a 12-inch puddle. For her June tests, Mackay altered the pour angle and found a 14- to 15-inch puddle would form in about eight minutes. The District Court believed that the primary concern with these tests was not their accuracy, but their relevancy. Saldana connects these tests to the size of the Kmart puddle after her fall and argues the time involved establishes constructive notice. Undisputed evidence shows, however, that Saldana’s fall and her recovery from that fall left her legs and skirt wet with car wax. This disturbance undoubtedly altered the size of the puddle; measurements of. how quickly wax spreads without such interference simply, have no bearing oh this case.
Similarly, the time necessary for a wax bottle to empty does not, by itself, provide information regarding when the spill commenced or concluded. Nothing in the record indicates exactly when the bottle was found to be completely empty, leaving no way to deduce when the spill began. The spill may have started just as Saldana reached the aisle and continued as she fell, as she was being helped up, or even afterward. The District Court, therefore, properly rejected Mackay’s reports.
The only other evidence Saldana points to regarding the amount of time the wax was on Kmart’s floor is her observation of dust on the puddle after she fell. We note, however, as did the District Court, that Saldana offered no evidence of how much dust was found, how long it would have taken for dust to accumulate, or whether the dust was picked up off the floor by the spreading wax or the force of Saldana’s fall. Standing alone, the mere presence of dust on the wax after Salda-na’s fall does not inform any decision as to the amount of time the wax was on the floor before the fall.
We, therefore, find that Saldana’s case rests solely on speculation that events unfolded in such a way as to render Kmart negligent. There was a complete absence of relevant evidence — from either side — on the critical question of how long the wax was on the floor, and the mere possibility that something occurred in a particular way is not enough, as a matter of law, for a jury to find it probably happened .that way. See Fedorczyk v. Caribbean Cruise Lines, 82 F.3d 69, 75 (3d Cir.1996) (applying New Jersey law); Lanni v. Pennsylvania RR, 371 Pa. 106, 111-12, 88 A.2d 887 (1952) (finding of constructive notice impossible where no evidence existed to show how long oily spot was on the floor); Richardson v. Ames Ave. Corp., 247 Neb. 128, 525 N.W.2d 212, 217 (1995) (holding a store not liable for a customer’s slip and fall on liquid soap where no evidence showed how long spill had existed). As the authors of the Restatement put it in one particularly pertinent illustration:
A, a customer in B’s store, slips on a banana peel near the door, and falls and is injured. The banana peel is fresh, and there is no evidence as to how long it has been on the floor. Since it is at least equally probable that it was dropped by a third person so short a time before that B had no reasonable opportunity to discover and remove it, it cannot be inferred that its presence was due to the negligence of B.
Restatement (Second) of Torts, S B28D, Illust. 7 (discussing res ipsa loquitur). We find the facts here indistinguishable from the Restatement example. While a plaintiff need not prove his or her case by a preponderance of the evidence to survive summary judgment, Saldana has not met even her modest burden of showing at least some relevant evidence that could support her claim. Accordingly, we will affirm the District Court’s grant of summary judgment.
II.
While discovery was taking place in the Saldana case, Andrew C. Simpson, Esq., then of the firm of Bryant, White & Barnes, P.C., attorneys for Kmart, moved before the District Court for sanctions against Saldana’s attorney, Lee Rohn, because of her use of language that he contended, in somewhat of an overstatement, violated the “fundamental precepts of legal ethics.” App. at 133. As the memorandum in support of the motion succinctly put it, “[t]he basis for this motion is Attorney Rohn’s repeated use of vulgarity, in particular the word ‘fuck,’ towards other members of the bar.” Id. The motion was prompted by Rohn telling Simpson, in the course of a disagreement on the telephone over scheduling depositions, “you know, Andy, go fuck yourself.” Id. at 178. The memorandum complained that Rohn “routinely” used the word “fuck” upon disagreeing with opposing counsel. Id. at 134.
A few preliminary comments. First, we do not condone Rohn’s concededly rather free-wheeling use of the word “fuck,” and nothing that follows should be taken as any indication that we do. Second, there is no contention that at any time Rohn used that word or any vulgar language before the District Court or in any document submitted to the Court. Third, there is a long and not particularly happy history between Rohn and at least one other member of the Bryant firm in addition to Simpson who, we note, rebuffed Rohn’s immediate attempt to apologize after the telephone incident. This history is not only readily apparent from the rather scathing submissions made by both sides, but from the fact that the motion and memorandum, although filed a mere three days after the fateful telephone disagreement, included a host of exhibits documenting, among other things, numerous occasions on which Rohn used the word between October 1993 and February 1997. This litany of incidents prompted Rohn to conclude that the firm had been “accumulating ammo” against her, id. at 190; whether or not that be the case, the history here certainly permits the conclusion that the firm’s attempt to portray itself as something akin to a knight in shining armor protecting the bar and the public from “such conduct” and preventing the “further degradation of the administration of justice and the reputation of the Virgin Island Bar,” id. at 136-37, may well be overstating its case.
Rohn opposed Kmart’s motion, and the District Court held a hearing, which, by order of the Court, was to have been limited “solely to the issue of Attorney Rohn’s behavior in this ease.” Id. at 367. After the hearing commenced, however, the Court stated that it had not intended by that order to limit the inquiry to this case but, rather, had intended to limit the inquiry to

[truncated for spike corpus]