Case: Braga v. Genlyte Group, Inc.
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Date: 2005-08-25
Citation: 420 F.3d 35
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 8933820

OBERDORFER, Senior District Judge.
This case tests the line between the workers’ compensation rights of an employee injured on a job in Massachusetts and the immunity from tort suit provided to the injured employee’s employer by the same Massachusetts workers’ compensation law that benefitted the injured employee, where the employer has participated in a series of mergers during which the employee’s job status remained unaffected. On the unique and relatively complex facts here, we find and conclude that this plaintiffs tort claim is barred by the Massachusetts workers’ compensation law, pursuant to which one of defendant’s merger successors has previously compensated plaintiff.
Plaintiff-appellant Antonio Braga (“Bra-ga”) received workers’ compensation benefits for an injury he sustained while an employee of Genlyte-Thomas Group, LLC (“Genlyte-Thomas”). He and his wife are suing in tort for that same injury Genlyte Group, Inc. (“Genlyte”). Braga had worked as an employee of Genlyte before it contributed substantially all of its assets (along with those contributed by Thomas Industries, Inc.) to create Genlyte-Thom-as. The Bragas claim that defects in a hydraulic press Braga was operating while working for Genlyte-Thomas before that merger caused his injury. The Bragas base their claims against Genlyte on its status as successor, by merger, to Lightolier Incorporated (“Lightolier”); it had owned the allegedly defective press when it merged with Braga’s then-employer. The Bragas claim that Lightolier knew the press was defective at the time of its merger, but that it did not disclose or remedy the defects.
The Bragas allege that this knowledge of the defect created inchoate liability for Lightolier that carried over in the merger, giving the Bragas a cause of action against Genlyte. Genlyte argues essentially that any liability was satisfied, and any tort claims barred, by Massachusetts workers’ compensation law — the privileges and immunities of which also carried forward in the merger. The Bragas counter that those immunities do not apply here because their tort claims, based on Lightolier’s conduct, arose independently from Genlyte’s workers’ compensation obligations.
This is the second time this case has come up on appeal. The district court initially dismissed the Bragas’ claims as barred by workers’ compensation in a one-sentence order that cited no Massachusetts law. Finding that the case presented a “complex and fact-bound” question of state law, a previous panel of this court reversed and remanded for “analysis of a more fully developed factual scenario under Massachusetts law.” Braga v. Genlyte, Inc., 57 Fed.Appx. 451, 454 (1st Cir.2003) (unpublished) (“Braga I”). On remand, the district court granted summary judgment for Genlyte, again holding that “plaintiffs’ claims are barred by workers’ compensation.”
The Bragas contend that the changes in Braga’s employer’s corporate structure over time relieve him of the barrier to tort claims generally applicable to those enjoying the benefits of workers’ compensation. Genlyte argues that its workers’ compensation tort immunity survived the mergers. The key question is whether, but for the mergers, Lightolier would have been liable to the Bragas. We hold that it would not have been. Accordingly, we conclude that the workers’ compensation barrier was not lifted by the transactions involved here and we affirm summary judgment in favor of the defendant, albeit on a theory different from that employed by the court below.
I. BACKGROUND
On November 18, 1998, Braga was injured while operating a hydraulic press (the “Press”) at a Genlyte-Thomas manufacturing facility in Fall River, Massachusetts (the “Fall River facility”). The Press became activated while Braga was trying to remove a piece of metal jammed in it. It slammed down on Braga’s hand, causing severe and permanent damage. He alleges that the Press was defective in that it lacked adequate guards to prevent an operator from unintentionally activating it, and that this defect caused his accident.
A. Corporate History
In January 1980, Braga began working as a press operator at the Fall River facility for Aluminum Processing Corporation (“APC”). APC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Lightolier, operated the Fall River facility at that time.
In September, 1980, Lightolier purchased the Press, second-hand, for use in its manufacturing facility in Norwich, Connecticut (the “Norwich facility”).
On Friday, January 15, 1982, APC (along with all then-existing subsidiaries of Lightolier) merged into Lightolier. Three days later, on Monday, January 18, 1982, Lightolier merged into BZ Holdings Corporation (“BZ Holdings”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of BZ Acquisition Corporation (“BZ Acquisition”). That same day, BZ Holdings changed its name to “Lightolier Incorporated.” Braga’s employment status continued unchanged, save that his employer was now Lightolier/BZ rather than APC.
In 1985, BZ Acquisition, which owned Lightolier/BZ, merged into Genlyte. Lightolier/BZ thus became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Genlyte.
In January 1991, Lightolier/BZ merged into Genlyte. Genlyte continued to operate the former Lightolier/BZ business under the name “Lightolier.” Braga’s employment again continued unchanged, save that his employer was now Genlyte.
Around this time, the Norwich facility was converted from manufacturing to warehousing use. In June 1991, Genlyte transferred the Press from its Norwich facility to its Fall River facility, where Braga worked.
On April 28, 1998, Genlyte and Thomas Industries each contributed substantially all of its corporate assets to create a new entity, Genlyte-Thomas. Genlyte became the majority owner of Genlyte-Thomas and Thomas became the minority owner. Genlyte-Thomas continued to do business under the “Lightolier” name. Braga’s employment again continued unchanged, save that his employer was now Genlyte-Thom-as. Braga was still an employee of Gen-lyte-Thomas when his accident occurred on November 18,1998.
After that accident, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration inspected the Press and cited Genlyte-Thomas for a violation because the “operating buttons of the [Press] were not adequately guarded to prevent unintentional operation.”
B. Litigation History
The Bragas first filed a “Complaint for Discovery” against Lightolier in state court in 1999. That complaint was dismissed without prejudice after some discovery.
The Bragas next filed a substantive suit against Lightolier in state court on September 6, 2001. After the case was removed to federal court on diversity grounds, plaintiffs amended the complaint to name Genlyte, one of Lightolier’s successors by merger, as the defendant.
On November 21, 2001, Genlyte moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim on the ground that it was barred by the workers’ compensation law. On January 4, 2002, the district court granted that motion to dismiss in a one-sentence endorsement on the face of the motion: “Allowed, as Lightolier, Inc. would also be an employer for this purpose. Herbolsheimer v. SMS Holding Co., 239 Mich. App. 236, 608 N.W.2d 487 ([Mich.Ct.App.] 2000).” The Bragas appealed.
On February 13, 2003, a panel of this court reversed and remanded for further proceedings. The court was “reluctant to affirm an order of dismissal where the district court neglected to analyze the questions raised by the complaint under the law governing the case,” that is, Massachusetts state law. Braga I, 57 Fed.Appx. at 454. The court noted that the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts had addressed the “questions raised by the intersection of the immunity of an employer under the workers’ compensation scheme and successor liability” in Gurry v. Cumberland Farms, 406 Mass. 615, 550 N.E.2d 127 (1990), which should be “central” to the analysis of this issue. Braga I, 57 Fed.Appx. at 454.
On remand, following limited discovery, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint. The Bragas asserted claims of negligence based on “(Old) ‘Lightolier’ ... negligently transferring by means of the merger, to BZ Holdings/(New) ‘Lightolier’ the defective [Press]” and of breach of the implied warranty of merchantability. His wife asserted a claim of loss of consortium.
On February 13, 2004, Genlyte moved for summary judgment on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Undisputed Facts.
On October 5, 2004, the district court granted that motion and again dismissed the plaintiffs’ claims. The district court’s analysis centered, as directed, on Gurry. The district court noted that Gurry permitted a suit in tort to proceed against an employer as successor of a corporation that “was never decedent’s employer and would have been susceptible to a third-party claim outside of the workers’ compensation protection.” On the other hand, the court recognized that, in Gurry, claims based on the conduct of a predecessor that had employed Gurry “failed because ‘all [the] acts and omissions alleged against [it] arose out of the direct employment relationship.’ ” (Citing Gurry, 550 N.E.2d at 131.) The district court framed the dis-positive question as whether Braga had been “an employee of Lightolier, the allegedly negligent predecessor corporation.” The court focused on whether Braga was employed by Lightolier/APC from its creation on Friday, January 15, 1982, through its merger with BZ Holdings three days later, on Monday, January 18, 1982. The district court held that Braga’s having “performed no work over the weekend is irrelevant to his employment status.” Because Braga’s employment was never terminated, it was “clear that [Lightolier/APC] did employ him, although it only had a brief existence.” Based on this reasoning, the district court concluded that plaintiffs’ claims were barred by the workers’ compensation statute.
II. DISCUSSION
We review the district court’s grant of summary judgment de novo. Burke v. Town of Walpole, 405 F.3d 66, 75 (1st Cir.2005). Like the lower court, we are to “constru[e] the record in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and re-solv[e] all reasonable inferences in that party’s favor.” Whitlock v. Mac-Gray, Inc., 345 F.3d 44, 45 (1st Cir.2003). Summary judgment is proper only if the record establishes that “there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c). We are not bound by the district court’s rationale, but may affirm its grant of summary judgment “on any ground supported by the record.” Cimon v. Gaffney, 401 F.3d 1, 4 (1st Cir.2005).
A. The Massachusetts Workers’ Compensation Scheme
The Massachusetts workers’ compensation statute generally provides the exclusive remedy for employees who suffer work-related injuries. Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 152, § 24. A non-employer third party tortfeasor, however, is not protected by the immunity from suit by an injured worker that workers’ compensation law affords that worker’s employer. Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 152, § 15. Injured employees are thus free to sue third party tortfeasors whose negligence caused or contributed to their work-place injuries.
Where a third party whose actions might subject it to a tort suit by an injured worker later merges with the injured worker’s employer — so that the employer and the “third party” become one and the same — a dilemma arises. After a merger, the surviving corporation is “liable for[ ] all liabilities and obligations of each of the constituent corporations in the same manner and to the same extent as if such ... surviving corporation had itself incurred such liabilities or obligations.” Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 156B, § 80(b). As successor to the alleged tortfeasor, the surviving entity should ordinarily be subject to suit by the injured employee to the same extent the third party would have been absent the merger. On the other hand, under the circumstances here, neither the plaintiffs, nor the state decisions on which they rely, explain to our satisfaction why the injured employee’s employer is not immunized from tort liability by the same law that provided compensation administratively to the injured employees. See, e.g., infra Part II.D.3.
B. The Dual Persona Doctrine
The Bragas claim that they should be able to sue Genlyte as successor to the original Lightolier despite the otherwise applicable workers’ compensation immunity. They rely on what is commonly referred to as the “dual persona” doctrine. According to that concept an “employer may become a third person, vulnerable to tort suit by an employee, if — and only if — ■ it possesses a second persona so completely independent from and unrelated to its status as employer that by established standards the law recognizes that persona as a separate legal person.” 6 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Laiv § 113.01[1], at 113-2 (2005) (“Larson”); see also Gurry, 550 N.E.2d at 131 (citing this definition from an earlier edition of the Larson treatise). Where such a “dual persona” exists, the dual persona doctrine may permit a tort suit only if the “nonemployer persona” owed the injured employee duties “totally separate from and unrelated to” duties arising out of the employment relationship. Larson, § 113.01[4], at 113-10 (emphasis in original).
Gurry is the leading Massachusetts case on the “dual persona” doctrine. The facts in Gurry, as here, are somewhat involved. Gurry worked for United Cranberry Growers Associates, Inc. (“Cranberry”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Delaware Food Store, Inc. (“DFS”). Cumberland Farms Dairy, Inc. (“Dairy”), another DFS subsidiary, sold managerial services to Cranberry. As part of these duties, Dairy designed, and commissioned a contractor to build, buggies for Cranberry. The next year, Cranberry and Dairy merged into DFS, which in turn merged into Cumberland Farms, Inc. (“Cumberland”). Gurry continued at his job, with Cumberland becoming his employer as a result of the mergers. Gurry was killed while working for Cumberland, operating one of the buggies. Gurry’s beneficiaries received workers’ compensation payments. The Gurry plaintiffs nonetheless sued Cumberland, alleging that negligent design, manufacture and maintenance of the buggy by its predecessors, Cranberry and Dairy, caused Gurry’s death.
The question thus presented was one of first impression in Massachusetts: could an employee injured on the job sue an employer for negligence on the part of the employer’s corporate predecessors? The Supreme Judicial Court found that the “answer depends on the interrelationship of two statutes: the business corporation law and the workers’ compensation act.” Gurry, 550 N.E.2d at 130 (citations omitted). The Gurry court observed that, under Massachusetts business corporation law, “Cumberland stood in the shoes of Cranberry [ ] and Dairy ..., inheriting any liabilities for tortious conduct, as well as any privileges in the form of statutory immunities, that those predecessors would have had.” Id. at 131 (citing Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 156B § 80(a)).
The court held that Cumberland could not be sued for Cranberry’s alleged negligence because Cranberry itself “would have been immune from suit since all the acts and omissions alleged against [it] arose out of the direct employment relationship” between it and Gurry. Id. On the other hand, “Dairy was never Kevin Gurry’s employer, and would have been susceptible to a third-party claim as a tort-feasor outside of the protection of workers’ compensation” if not for the merger. Id. (citing Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 152 § 15 (1988 ed.)). Had the merger not occurred, plaintiffs would have been able to bring a third party suit against Dairy, the company that designed and supervised the manufacture of defective equipment for the decedent’s then-employer, Cranberry. The Gurry court emphasized that “the workers’ compensation statute was intended to deal with injuries and liability occurring in the course of the employer-employee relationship.

[truncated for spike corpus]