Case: Cooper Distributing Co. v. Amana Refrigeration, Inc.
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
Date: 1999-06-18
Citation: 180 F.3d 542
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11664046

OPINION OF THE COURT
SCIRICA, Circuit Judge.
This is the second appeal of a damages award for wrongful termination of a franchise under the New Jersey Franchise Practice Act (“NJFPA”). In the first appeal, we vacated the award and remanded for a new trial on the appellant’s NJFPA damages. See Cooper Distributing Co. v. Amana Refrigeration, Inc., 63 F.3d 262 (3d Cir.1995) (Cooper I). The plaintiff appealed again following the second trial. After argument, we remanded so that the District Court could rule on one open matter. Thereafter, the parties returned to this Court. We will affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand for further proceedings.
I.
From 1961 to 1991, Cooper Distributing Company (“Cooper”) was a distributor of appliances manufactured by Amana Refrigeration, Inc. (“Amana”). Under the terms of their distribution contract, Coo-pei* bought a specified quantity of products at a wholesale discount from Amana and then resold them to retailers, who in turn sold them to consumers. Although Cooper did not have exclusive distribution rights under the contract, Cooper was the only distributor of Amana products in its territory, which primarily encompassed New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. By 1991, Cooper’s sales of Amana products generated $20 million per year in revenues and constituted about 80 percent of Cooper’s business.
In November 1991, Amana attempted to terminate its distribution relationship with Cooper on ten days’ notice, citing a provision in the distribution contract allowing either party to do so. It is undisputed that the attempted termination was motivated by changes in Amana’s nationwide business strategy rather than unsatisfactory performance on Cooper’s part.
Cooper sued Amana in New Jersey state court, alleging four causes of action: (1) unlawful termination without good cause in violation of the NJFPA; (2) breach of contract; (3) breach of the implied obligation of good faith and fair dealing; and (4) tortious interference with prospective economic advantage. Amana removed the case to federal district court in New Jersey. In February 1992, the District Court issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting Amana from “ ‘taking any action whatsoever to limit ... or in any way interfere with Cooper’s activities as a distributor of Amana products.’ ” Cooper I, 63 F.3d at 267-68 (quoting the injunction). The injunction was still in effect when the parties went to trial in February 1994.
At trial, the jury found Amana liable on all four counts and awarded Cooper $4.375 million in compensatory damages on its NJFPA claim, $2 million on its breach of contract claim, and zero in actual damages on both of the remaining two common-law claims. It also awarded Cooper $3 million in punitive damages on the tortious interference claim. Accordingly, on March 8, 1994, the District Court entered a judgment of $9.375 million in damages to Cooper and dissolved the injunction, thereby allowing Amana to terminate the distributorship and pay damages.
On appeal, we affirmed the judgment of liability under the NJFPA but held the District Court should have found as a matter of law that there was no breach of contract; therefore, we reversed the award of $2 million in damages on that claim. See Cooper I, 63 F.3d at 280-81. We also reversed the award of $3 million in punitive damages for tortious interference because no actual damages had been found, see id. at 284, and we vacated the award of $4.375 million in NJFPA damages and remanded for a new trial on that issue, see id. at 277-78.
Cooper I identified two defects in the original calculation of NJFPA damages. First, the jury had mistakenly assumed that Cooper had an exclusive right to sell Amana products to retailers in its territory. This assumption, we found, was expressly contradicted by the unambiguous terms of the contract and it resulted in a significantly higher valuation of the franchise. See id. at 278. Second, we held the franchise had been valued as of the wrong date. The District Court had instructed the jury to value the franchise as of November 8, 1991, the date on which Amana first attempted to terminate the franchise. As we pointed out, however, the more appropriate valuation date was March 8, 1994, the date on which the franchise actually was terminated. Cooper had continued to earn income from its franchise after November 8, 1991. Thus, to value the franchise as of that date would bestow upon Cooper a “double recovery,” as Cooper would receive both the value of the franchise on November 8, 1991 — that is, the present value of lost future earnings from the franchise — and the actual earnings from the franchise after that date. Id. Consequently, we held “the proper date of valuation in this case is March 8, 1994,” id., and remanded for “a new trial on [NJFPA damages] consistent with this opinion,” id. at 285.
On remand, the District Court ruled pri- or to trial that the “only issue” in the case was the franchise’s fair market value to a hypothetical buyer and seller as of March 8, 1994. Thus, Cooper was barred from presenting evidence relating to additional damages theories, including the value of the franchise to the actual parties and the amount of lost profits Cooper allegedly suffered before March 8,1994.
In the second trial, Cooper received an award of $377,000. Cooper now appeals, asserting four grounds for reversal: (1) the District Court erred in limiting the scope of the second trial to a determination of the fair market value of the franchise as of March 8, 1994; (2) the court’s jury instructions were misleading and erroneous; (3) the court improperly allowed hearsay testimony and failed to give effect to stipulations by Amana; and (4) the court erroneously denied Cooper’s post-trial motion for prejudgment interest.
II.
A. Valuation of the Cooper Franchise
Cooper argues the District Court misconstrued our mandate in Cooper I, preventing it from proving important components of its damages: the value of the franchise to Cooper and Amana specifically, rather than to a hypothetical buyer and seller; Cooper’s lost profits between November 8, 1991 and March 8, 1994; the value of Cooper’s complementary distribution lines; and the enhanced value of the franchise due to Amana’s subsequent expansion of its distribution line. Amana responds that the District Court’s restriction of damages to the fair market value of the franchise as of March 8, 1994 was not only consistent with Cooper I, but was required by the New Jersey Supreme Court’s decision in Westfield Centre Service, Inc. v. Cities Service Oil Co., 86 N.J. 453, 432 A.2d 48 (1981).
We exercise plenary review on these issues because they involve whether the District Court properly interpreted the law of the case as set forth in Cooper I. See Feather v. United Mine Workers of America, 903 F.2d 961, 964 (3d Cir.1990). It is “axiomatic” that on remand after an appellate court decision, the trial court “must proceed in accordance with the mandate and the law of the case as established on appeal.” Bankers Trust Co. v. Bethlehem Steel Corp., 761 F.2d 943, 949 (3d Cir.1985). Moreover, where (as here) the mandate requires the District Court to proceed in a manner “consistent” with the appellate court decision, the effect is “ ‘to make the opinion a part of the mandate as completely as though the opinion had been set out at length.’ ” Id. (quoting Noel v. United Aircraft Corp., 359 F.2d 671, 674 (3d Cir.1966)).
Our opinion in Cooper I did not expressly address whether the measures of damages that Cooper now proposes should be included in the scope of the second trial. As noted, we remanded in order for the District Court to remedy two errors in the original calculation of damages: the jury’s mistaken assumption that Cooper had possessed an exclusive distributorship, and its valuation of the franchise as of the wrong date. Cooper does not claim either error was repeated in the second trial. Moreover, to the extent our opinion provided guidance as to the specific method by which damages should be calculated on remand, we held the franchise should be valued according to “ ‘either the present value of lost future earnings or the present market value of the lost business, but not both.’ ” 63 F.3d at 278 (quoting Johnson v. Oroweat Foods Co., 785 F.2d 503, 507 (4th Cir.1986)). The District Court’s choice of the latter of these two measures was consistent with that mandate.
It was also consistent with New Jersey law, which controls in this diversity case. The statute itself does not specify a particular measure of damages: “Any franchisee may bring an action against its franchisor for violation of this act ... to recover damages sustained by reason of any violation of this act and, where appropriate, shall be entitled to injunctive relief.” N.J. Stat. Ann. § 56:10-10 (West 1998). But in Westfield, the New Jersey Supreme Court held that
a franchisor who in good faith and for a bona fide reason terminates, cancels or fails to renew a franchise for any reason other than the franchisee’s substantial breach of its obligations has violated [the NJFPA] and is liable to the franchisee for the loss occasioned thereby, namely, the reasonable value of the business less the amount realizable on liquidation. These are the damages contemplated by N.J.S.A. 56:10-10....
Westfield, 432 A.2d at 57. The court further held that “[rjeasonable value would be that price upon which willing parties, buyer and seller, would agree for the sale of the franchisee’s business as a going concern.” Id. at 55. It is clear from the court’s discussion that these “willing parties” are hypothetical buyers and sellers, not the actual parties in the case: for example, the court noted the potential usefulness of IRS valuation techniques and expert testimony based on comparable sales in the area. See id. Westfield appears to be the only case that discusses the proper measure of damages under the NJFPA.
Here, Amana terminated Cooper “in good faith and for a bona fide reason” and not for “the franchisee’s substantial breach of its obligations.” See Cooper I, 63 F.3d at 267 (describing the business reasons for which Amana decided to terminate Cooper’s franchise). Thus, under Westfield Amana is liable to Cooper for a loss equal to the value of the franchise as measured by its fair market value to a hypothetical buyer and seller, minus the value of assets that can be liquidated by Cooper.
The question is whether this measure of damages necessarily excludes the other measures advanced by Cooper. As we discuss, Westfield and our mandate in Cooper I exclude most of these additional damages theories, but they do not refute Cooper’s “lost profits” argument.
1. The Value of the Franchise to Cooper and Amana
Cooper contends the District Court should have allowed it to present evidence of the franchise’s value to the parties themselves, rather than its market value as measured by what third parties would be willing to pay for it. As noted, however, Westfield suggests the opposite. See 432 A.2d at 55 (“Reasonable value would be that price upon which willing parties, buyer and seller, would agree for the sale of the franchisee’s business as a going concern.”). Moreover, our opinion in Cooper I refers, variously, to “the current value of [the] business,” “the value of the business as a going concern,” and “the present market value of the lost business.” 63 F.3d at 278. Such terms suggest an objective, not subjective, measure of the franchise’s value. Accordingly, we believe the District Court correctly determined that the purported value of the franchise to Cooper and Amana themselves was not a proper measure of damages.
2. Pro-March 8, 1994 Lost Profits
Cooper argues that although Ama-na did not actually succeed in terminating the franchise until March 8, 1994, Cooper’s uncertain status before that date caused a decline in its profits during the November 1991 to March 1994 period. The District Court appears to have acknowledged this point. See App. at 319 (statement of the District Court that “I can’t believe that ... [Amana’s counsel] would have for a moment attempted to argue in his opening that the jury’s verdict in the first trial established Mr. Cooper suffered no harm from Amana’s conduct during the period from mid-1991 to March 8th, 1994”). Lost profits would not be accounted for in a valuation of the franchise as of March 8, 1994 because that value represents only the lost future profits of the business: that is, the present value of the profits Cooper would have earned after March 8, 1994, had its franchise not been unlawfully terminated. See Cooper I, 63 F.3d at 278. Thus, Cooper contends the pre-March 8, 1994 lost profits must be included in the damages calculation in order to make it whole. In response, Amana argues that because Westfield identifies only one measure of damages (fair market value of the franchise at the time of termination), if implicitly forbids other measures, such as lost profits prior to termination.
We find no support for Amana’s argument, either in Westfield or elsewhere in New Jersey law. The franchisee in West-field was a gasoline station owner whose business was not affected by uncertainty surrounding his franchise status. Consequently, the fair market value at the date of his franchise’s termination was a complete and comprehensive measure of the harm he suffered. There is no reason to believe Westfield precludes lost-profit damages in a case where attempted termination of the franchise itself causes a substantial decline in business. In fact, Wesi-field’s reference to “the legislative intent to make franchisees economically whole” supports the inclusion of lost profits. 432 A.2d at 58 (awarding attorney’s fees); see also Winer Motors, Inc. v. Jaguar Rover Triumph, Inc., 208 N.J.Super. 666, 506 A.2d 817, 823 (1986) (holding that under Connecticut franchise law, an award for improper termination “should have two components, the losses provable to that date, and the future damages based upon’ the reasonably anticipated net future profits of the dealership,” and noting that there is “little difference between the law of New Jersey and Connecticut on this subject”). Here, Cooper advances the plausible claim that retailers were aware of Cooper’s ongoing litigation with Amana and consequently did not know whether they could count on Cooper for long-term sales and warranty service on Amana products. As a result, at least some retailers may have chosen to reduce or eliminate their dealings with- Cooper even before the date of actual termination.
Although we express no opinion on the extent of Cooper’s lost profits, or even their existence, we believe it was error to preclude Cooper from presenting evidence on the issue. This component of damages was not expressly commanded by Cooper I or Westfield, .but it is undeniably a part of the loss suffered by Cooper as a result of Amana’s unlawful termination of its franchise. Inclusion of lost profits during this period is the logical result of shifting the valuation date from November 1991 to March 1994. Accordingly, we will reverse and remand for a new trial on this issue.
3. Cooper’s Loss of Complementary Lines
Cooper also contends its damages should have included the value of what it calls “complementary lines,” that is, product lines carried by Cooper for the sole purpose of complementing its Amana products. The complementary lines consisted primarily of Hardwick, In-Sink-Erator, and Dacor products. Cooper alleges that when it lost the Amana franchise, its ability to sell these products at a profit was destroyed.
We do not believe this issue warrants a new trial. Westfield specifically instructs that the value of assets retained by the franchisee is to be deducted from the damages award. See 432 A.2d at 57. It may be true that Cooper would not have purchased the complementary lines if it did not also sell Amana products. But that fact does not have any legal signif

[truncated for spike corpus]