Case: Khan v. Gallitano
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
Date: 1999-06-11
Citation: 180 F.3d 829
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11666265

MANION, Circuit Judge.
Plaintiff Lynda Khan, an attorney representing herself pro se, sued six former or current officials of Elk Grove Village, Illinois, and two private attorneys, alleging that the defendants had wrongfully interfered with a contract between Khan and a client. Khan asserted two claims: an Illinois tort law claim for interference with contract and a federal claim under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. For her federal claim, Khan alleged that the defendants violated her rights under the Contracts Clause and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The district court dismissed the federal claim under Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(6), and then declined to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the state law claim. Khan now appeals the dismissal of her § 1983 claim, and the defendants cross-appeal the district court’s refusing to award them attorney’s fees as the prevailing party under 42 U.S.C. § 1988. We affirm.
I. Background
We take Khan’s well-pleaded facts as true, and we take some of the background facts from our prior decision in a related case, Serfecz v. Jewel Food Stores, 67 F.3d 591 (7th Cir.1995). In 1977, Joseph Ser-fecz purchased Grove Mall in Elk Grove Village. Serfecz’s anchor tenant was Jewel Food Stores, Inc., which had leased space to operate a grocery store in the mall since 1963. Jewel’s lease expired in 1986, and Jewel renewed it for five years, which the lease permitted it to do up to three times. But in 1987 Jewel moved its store into the newer Elk Crossing Mall, which was across the street from Grove Mall. Jewel continued to pay rent under its lease with Serfecz’s Grove Mall, and, allegedly as a means of keeping out any competing grocery stores, had no intention of terminating the lease. Indeed, after its initial five-year renewal expired, Jewel renewed for another five years, although it was paying for empty space. Later Jewel wanted to sublease its space in Grove Mall to a roller rink, but Serfecz refused to allow it. Jewel then sued Serfecz in the Illinois state courts, seeking a declaration that Jewel could sub-lease its space to the roller rink. As will be seen, this was the first of numerous lawsuits involving Serfecz. He hired Khan to defend this suit, and she won a judgment that the proposed sublease was not permitted. The judgment was affirmed on appeal.
Serfecz then retained Khan to sue Jewel, and they made a contingency fee contract that promised Khan one-third of Ser-fecz’s recovery. In June 1992, Khan filed a complaint for Serfecz in federal district court against Jewel and numerous others asserting violations of the Sherman Act, breach of the lease agreement, and malicious prosecution. The district court ultimately granted summary judgment to the defendants on Serfecz’s antitrust claims and his malicious prosecution claim, but permitted the case to proceed on one part of the breach of lease claim. The district court entered a final judgment under Fed.R.Civ.P. 54(b) on the claims for which it had granted summary judgment, and this court affirmed. Serfecz, 67 F.3d at 603. (Apparently the remaining part of this suit is still pending.)
In 1994, before the grant of partial summary judgment against Serfecz, defendant Gallitano became president of the Elk Grove Board of Trustees. He publicly announced that he would have Grove Mall condemned if Serfecz did not drop his suit against Jewel. Serfecz requested a zoning change so that he could redevelop Grove Mall. Elk Grove denied the request, but Gallitano stated publicly that if Serfecz dismissed his antitrust suit against Jewel, the request would be approved. Khan alleges numerous other instances in which Gallitano and others in the Elk Grove government pressured Serfecz to abandon his legal rights. Serfecz even filed a federal civil rights suit against Gallitano and others, but he dismissed it in the Fall of 1994 when Elk Grove officials assured him that they would cooperate with his redeveloping Grove Mall. That redevelopment never happened.
We now come to the two lawsuits that principally concern us here: Elk Grove’s condemnation proceeding and Serfecz’s second federal civil rights suit. In January 1995 Elk Grove filed a proceeding to condemn Grove Mall. Serfecz hired defendant Hurley, a private attorney, to represent him. Eventually defendant Serfecz-Edlund, another private attorney who we are told is Serfecz’s niece, also joined Hurley in defending this action. Khan was not involved in this proceeding. For several months, the parties apparently tried to negotiate a settlement to this proceeding but were unsuccessful. While Hurley and Serfecz-Edlund continued to represent Serfecz in the condemnation proceeding, in August 1995 Serfecz again retained Khan to bring another federal civil rights suit. Serfecz and Khan made a second contingency fee agreement. Again, Khan would get one-third of Serfecz’s recovery. Ser-fecz agreed not to dismiss the suit without consulting Khan and agreed that she would have to be a part of any settlement negotiations. On September 8, 1995, Khan filed a complaint for Serfecz in the Northern District of Illinois against Gallitano and numerous others alleging various federal civil rights violations.
In April 1996 Hurley and Serfecz-Ed-lund finally negotiated a settlement of the condemnation proceeding with Elk Grove. Serfecz would receive nearly $7 million as compensation for the mall, and he would dismiss the civil rights action that Khan had filed on his behalf. No one apprised Khan of the negotiations and she was not involved in them. Counsel for the defendants in the civil rights case — -without Khan’s knowledge — told the district court that they had settled that case and gave the court a copy of a settlement agreement signed by Serfecz. So the court dismissed the suit with leave to refile within 30 days.
On February 3, 1998, Khan filed this suit. She alleged that Serfecz agreed to dismiss the civil rights action only because the defendants had wrongfully coerced him. Khan asserted a federal claim under § 1983 and a state tort claim. The district court dismissed the federal claim under Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(6) and declined to take supplemental jurisdiction over the state claim. The defendants sought attorney’s fees as the prevailing parties under 42 U.S.C. § 1988, but the district court awarded no fees because it concluded that Khan had in good faith argued to extend existing law. Khan appealed the dismissal and the defendants cross-appealed the denial of fees.
II. Analysis
A. Khan’s § 1983 Claim
Because the district court dismissed Khan’s federal claim under Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(6), we must decide a legal question: Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint are true, and giving Khan the benefit of all reasonable inferences to be drawn from those facts, has she stated a cognizable cause of action under 42 U.S.C. § 1983? See Kaplan v. Shure Brothers, Inc., 153 F.3d 413, 417-18 (7th Cir.1998). Section 1983 provides that “[e]very person who, under color of statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State ... subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States ... to the deprivation of any rights secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law....” Khan alleges that the defendants violated two separate provisions of the federal constitution: the Contracts Clause and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. We address each one in turn.
1. Contracts Clause
Section 10 of Article I sets out a series of limits on the powers of the States, including the limit that “[n]o State shall ... pass any ... law impairing the Obligation of Contracts.” A State violates the Contracts Clause if a “change in state law has ‘operated as a substantial impairment of a contractual relationship.’ ” General Motors Corp. v. Romein, 503 U.S. 181, 186, 112 S.Ct. 1105, 117 L.Ed.2d 328 (1992) (quoting Allied Structural Steel Co. v. Spannaus, 438 U.S. 234, 244, 98 S.Ct. 2716, 57 L.Ed.2d 727 (1978)). “This inquiry has three components: whether there is a contractual relationship, whether a change in law impairs that contractual relationship, and whether the impairment is substantial.” Id. Here the first component is met because Khan and Serfecz had a contract, but the second component is not met. The defendants’ allegedly wrongful acts that induced Serfecz to terminate his contract with Khan were not a “change in law,” even though the defendants were state actors. It has long been settled that the language of the Contracts Clause— pass any law — prohibits only legislative changes that impair contracts. See Tidal Oil Co. v. Flanagan, 263 U.S. 444, 451 & n. 1, 44 S.Ct. 197, 68 L.Ed. 382 (1924) (collecting cases); Barrows v. Jackson, 346 U.S. 249, 260, 73 S.Ct. 1031, 97 L.Ed. 1586 (1953) (citing Tidal Oil); Nowicki v. Ullsvik, 69 F.3d 1320, 1325 (7th Cir.1995) (citing Barrows). Khan argues that there was a legislative change here because the Elk Grove board approved the settlement of the condemnation proceeding. We reject that argument. Khan has alleged that the defendants acted tortiously, possibly unconstitutionally, and Elk Grove approved the result of their wrongful acts. But she has not alleged that a legislature “pass[ed]” an unconstitutional law.
2. Substantive Due Process
Khan also alleges that the defendants violated her rights under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Section One of the Fourteenth Amendment provides: “nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” Khan does not complain that the process used by the defendants was inadequate; rather she relies on the concept of “substantive due process” as a bar to the alleged deprivation, no matter what process was used. The courts have long struggled to identify the appropriate analysis for substantive-due-process claims. In a series of eases, a majority of Justices on the Supreme Court could not agree on a single analysis to use in substantive-due-process cases. See, e.g., Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 112 S.Ct. 2791, 120 L.Ed.2d 674 (1992) (5 opinions); Albright v. Oliver, 510 U.S. 266, 114 S.Ct. 807, 127 L.Ed.2d 114 (1994) (5 opinions). But in Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 117 S.Ct. 2258, 138 L.Ed.2d 772 (1997), a five-Justice majority of the Court agreed on a single analysis.
“The Due Process Clause guarantees more than fair process, and the ‘liberty’ it protects includes more than the absence of physical restraint. The Clause also provides heightened protection against government interference with certain fundamental rights and liberty interests.” Glucksberg, 521 U.S. at 719, 117 S.Ct. at 2267 (citations omitted). But the Court expressed its reluctance to find new substantive-due-process rights:
[W]e have always been reluctant to expand the concept of substantive due process because guideposts for responsible decision making in. this uncharted area are scarce and open-ended. By extending constitutional protection to an asserted right or liberty interest, we, to a great extent, place the matter outside the arena of public debate and legislative action. We must therefore exercise the utmost care whenever we are asked to break new ground in this field, lest the liberty protected by the Due Process Clause be subtly transformed into the policy preferences of the members of this Court.
521 U.S. at 720, 117 S.Ct. at 2267-68 (citations, internal quotations, and alterations omitted); see also National Paint & Coatings Assoc. v. City of Chicago, 45 F.3d 1124, 1129 (7th Cir.1995) (“[W]e have spent some time looking through the Constitution for the Substantive Due Process Clause without finding it.... The fact that [substantive due process] is a doctrine owing its existence to constitutional structure rather than a clear grant of power to the judiciary has led the Supreme Court to be cautious in its use”). Synthesizing its pri- or precedent, the Court set out the two “features” of the substantive-due-process analysis:
First, ... the Due Process Clause specially protects those fundamental rights and liberties which are, objectively, deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition, and implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, such that neither liberty nor justice would exist if they were sacrificed. Second, we have required in substantive-due-process cases a careful description of the asserted fundamental liberty interest. Our Nation’s history, legal traditions, and practices thus provide the crucial guideposts for responsible decision making that direct and restrain our exposition of the Due Process Clause.
Id. at 720-21, 117 S.Ct. at 2268 (citations and internal quotations omitted).
We must therefore “carefully formulate the interest” that Khan wants constitutionally protected. 521 U.S. at 722, 117 S.Ct. at 2269. In Glucksberg, the Court of Appeals had stated the interest in general terms, and the Supreme Court rejected this approach. Id. Rather than asking, as the Ninth Circuit en banc had, whether there was “a right to die,” the Court asked whether “the ‘liberty’ specially protected by the Due Process Clause includes a right to commit suicide which itself includes a right to assistance in doing so.” Id. Khan states the interest at issue as the “right to contract” and the right to perform a specific contract. But as in Glucksberg such an abstract statement of the right at issue is far too general to guide our analysis of the specific conduct about which Khan complains. She does not allege that the defendants deprived her of a general right to enter into contracts. And while the defendants state the issue narrowly, they misstate it, claiming that we must decide whether Khan has “a right to pursue a cause of action against the wishes of her client even after her terminable at will relationship with [the client] had ended.” Appellees’ Brief at p. 10. Khan does not seek, as the defendants suggest, to step into Serfecz’s shoes and become the plaintiff in the civil rights suit that he dismissed, or act as a third-party plaintiff asserting Serfecz’s civil rights. Cf. United States Dept. of Labor v. Triplett, 494 U.S. 715, 720, 110 S.Ct. 1428, 108 L.Ed.2d 701 (1990) (permitting attorney to assert constitutional rights of his clients). At bottom, Khan alleges that but for the tortious acts of the defendants (strangers to her contract), Serfecz (her contract partner) would not have terminated their relationship and so Khan would have gotten some greater benefit from this relationship. So the precise liberty at issue is the right to be free from state officials tortiously interfering with one’s existing contractual relationships.
With this carefully formulated interest identified, we must “examin[e] our Nation’s history, legal traditions, and practices,” Glucksberg, 521 U.S. at 710, 117 S.Ct. at 2262, to see what place this interest has. Khan must show not merely that the defendants injured her in some legal sense but that they deprived her of a liberty deeply rooted in our history and tradition. Khan’s burden is great because, as we noted, courts are generally reluctant to recognize new substantive-due-process rights, Glucksberg, 521 U.S. at 719-22, 117 S.Ct. at 2267-68, and are particularly reluctant when such rights are, as in this case, nothing more than a state-law tort made into a constitutional tort, see, e.g., DeShaney v. Winnebago County Dept. of Social Servs., 489 U.S. 189, 202, 109 S.Ct. 998, 103 L.Ed.2d 249 (1989) (“[T]he Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment ... does not transform every tort committed by a state actor into a constitutional violation.”); Daniels v. Williams, 474 U.S. 327, 332, 106 S.Ct. 662, 88 L.Ed.2d 662 (1986) (“Our Constitution deals with the large concerns of the governors and the governed, but it does not purport to supplant traditional tort law in laying down rules of conduct to regulate liability for injuries that attend

[truncated for spike corpus]