Case: Scheduled Airlines Traffic Offices, Inc. v. Objective, Inc.
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Date: 1999-06-14
Citation: 180 F.3d 583
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 11664361

Affirmed by published opinion. Judge MURNAGHAN wrote the opinion, in which Judge WIDENER and Judge HAMILTON joined.
OPINION
MURNAGHAN, Circuit Judge:
Scheduled Airlines Traffic Offices, Inc. (“SATO”) and Objective: Inc. (“Objective”) agreed to produce a travel software system together.. After Objective ceased work on the project, SATO filed a complaint for breach of contract and breach of warranty against Objective. Objective filed an answer and six counterclaims. The district court granted SATO’s motion for summary judgment on four of the six counterclaims — namely, the claims alleging defamation, violations of the Lanham Act, breach of fiduciary duty, and misappropriation of trade secrets. After the jury trial, the court granted Objective’s motion to dismiss SATO’s breach of warranty claim, as well as SATO’s motion for judgment as a matter of law on Objective’s two remaining counterclaims, breach of contract and fraud in the inducement of the contract. On SATO’s remaining breach of contract claim, the jury found in favor of SATO and awarded the company .$1.00 in damages. On appeal, Objective challenges the court’s grant of summary judgment and judgment as a matter of law against all its counterclaims.
I.
Appellee SATO,, a Delaware corporation whose corporate headquarters are located in Arlington, Virginia, provides travel management services. Before 1994, SATO provided travel services only to government agencies. In April-1994, SATO set out to expand its business to include travel services for private sector companies. SATO envisioned a custom software system that would assist in providing travel management services to its prospective private sector customers. The software system, dubbed Eagleware, would be installed on the desktop computers of SATO travel agents at a reservation call center. A second software system, Navigator, would be used by individual travelers to make travel arrangements directly from their own personal or office computer.
To develop the software systems, SATO considered proposals from several outside firms. In March 1994, Objective’s President and Chief Executive Officer, Bernadette Reiter, submitted a proposal to SATO recommending use of an Objective software programming tool called Macro-scope to produce the Eagleware and Navigator Systems. Objective offered a fixed-price contract of $900,000 to complete all the work.
In May 1994, SATO entered into a Software and Development Support Agreement (“Agreement”) with Objective to develop the custom software. Under the Agreement, Objective assigned to SATO all of its “proprietary rights in and to the [Software] System and all ‘System Updates’ and ‘System Enhancements.’ ” Objective also granted SATO “the right and license to use, reproduce, sublicense, prepare derivative works, distribute copies, publicly perform and display such Proprietary Components for use in connection with the System.” Finally, the Agreement was the complete contractual agreement of the parties. As the terms of the contract make clear, it “supersede^] all prior oral or written agreements, commitments or understandings with respect to the matters provided for [therein].” Objective signed the Agreement on May 12, 1994, and SATO signed days later.
In July 1994, SATO requested that Objective prepare a simulation of the software systems under development for use at an annual travel industry convention to be held the following month. The simulation was to demonstrate how the travel call center would work when the software was completed. Objective requested an additional $200,000 for its work assisting SATO on the demonstration units, which SATO agreed to and paid.
Having failed to complete the Eagleware and Navigator Systems by the targeted deadline of January 31, 1995, presumably in part due to its work on the simulation, Objective committed to a completion date of May 31, 1995. Objective tested the software components in May 1995 and uncovered significant problems that made the software inoperable. Despite the problems, Objective’s management directed its employees to stop programming and vacate the project as of May 31, 1995. At the time of Objective’s departure from the project, the Eagleware System was incomplete, and no programming work had been done on the Navigator System. Objective had, however, received full payment from SATO.
In a letter dated May 31, 1995, SATO specifically notified Objective that its work had not been completed. SATO emphasized that Objective remained “obligated under the Software Development and Support Agreement (the Agreement) to develop, deliver, install and test an Eagle-ware System which operates in accordance with the Detail Design.” SATO complained that “Objective [was] withdrawing its development team prior to development being completed.” As a result of the software defects, SATO never used the Objective-programmed Eagleware software. Instead, SATO constructed its own Eagleware System using a different programming tool called Powerbuilder.
On February 24, 1997, SATO filed a complaint for breach of contract and breach of warranty against Objective. On March 17, 1997, Objective filed an answer and counterclaim. In response to SATO’s motion to dismiss, Objective filed an amended answer and six-count amended counterclaim. On September 5, 1997, the district court granted SATO’s motion for summary judgment on four of Objective’s six amended counterclaims. Specifically, the court granted summary judgment to SATO on the counterclaims for defamation, Lanham Act violations, breach of fiduciary duty, and misappropriation of trade secrets. The court denied SATO’s motion for summary judgment on Objective’s counterclaims for breach of contract and fraud in the inducement of the contract.
On October 27, 1997, a jury trial commenced. The court denied Objective’s motion for judgment as a matter of law on SATO’s breach of contract claim, finding that there was ample evidence to proceed, and granted Objective’s motion to dismiss the breach of warranty claim. At the close of evidence, the court granted SATO’s motion for judgment as a matter of law on Objective’s breach of contract and fraud in the inducement of the contract counterclaims. On October 30, 1997, the jury found in favor of SATO on its breach of contract claim and awarded $1.00 in damages. Accordingly, the court entered an Order to this effect, from which Objective now appeals.
II.
A. Judgment as a Matter of Law Against Objective’s Counterclaim for Breach of Contract
At the close of evidence, the district court entered judgment as a matter of law against Objective’s breach of contract counterclaim, determining that the claim only sought damages for Mure projected profits which Virginia law prohibited. We review a district court’s grant of judgment as a matter of law de novo. See Benesh v. Amphenol Corp., 52 F.3d 499, 502 (4th Cir.1995). On review, the facts are viewed and inferences are drawn in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. See Singer v. Dungan, 45 F.3d 823, 827 (4th Cir.1995). Judgment as a matter of law is proper only when, without weighing the credibility of the evidence, there can be but one reasonable conclusion as to the proper judgment. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 249-50, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986); Singer, 45 F.3d at 826.
Under Virginia law, a loss of anticipated profits from an unestablished business cannot be a proper measure of damages. See Mullen v. Brantley, 213 Va. 765, 195 S.E.2d 696, 700 (1973). The Supreme Court of Virginia determined in Mullen that “such a business is a speculative venture, the successful operation of which depends upon future bargains, the status of the market, and too many other contingencies to furnish a safeguard in fixing the measure of damages.” Id. at 700. Appellant Objective argues that the district court misapplied the Mullen rule. Noting that there is no evidence that its custom software project for SATO is an essentially different business from its prior custom software projects, Appellant maintains that it is an ongoing business so, under Goldstein v. Kaestner, 243 Va. 169, 413 S.E.2d 347, 350 (1992) (holding that even though there was a change in ownership of supermarket, the day-to-day operations remained the same, so lost profits were recoverable), the jury should have been allowed to make a reasonable estimate of lost future profits.
To the contrary, the Virginia Supreme Court in Goldstein determined that the plaintiff was entitled to lost profits only after it concluded that the predecessor store was “nearly identical” to its successor. 413 S.E.2d at 350. The evidence establishing that “the day-to-day operations of the [two stores] were substantially the same” provided a sufficient basis for the jury to estimate lost profits with “reasonable certainty.” Id. In the case at bar, however, there is no such basis on which to estimate damages. The software product was newly developed, so there was no predecessor product on which to predicate a reasonably certain estimate of lost profits. Rather, any estimate would be rooted in speculation and conjecture, both of which constitute improper grounds for damages under Virginia law. See id. at 349; Mullen, 195 S.E.2d at 700 (denying-damages for lost profits where “the anticipated profits ... could have been based only on speculation and conjecture”); see also La-Vay Corp. v. Dominion Federal Savings & Loan Association, 830 F.2d 522, 529 (4th Cir.1987) (“Damages may not be awarded ... where an award would be based on an estimate of lost profits which is speculative.”), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1065, 108 S.Ct. 1027, 98 L.Ed.2d 991 (1988).
It does not matter that Objective may have produced other custom software previously. See Mullen, 195 S.E.2d at 698, 700 (denying damage award for lost profits even where plaintiff had operated other franchises of same restaurant); Pennsylvania State Shopping Plazas, Inc. v. Olive, 202 Va. 862, 120 S.E.2d 372, 375, 377-78 (1961) (setting aside damage award for lost profits from unconstructed service station even where plaintiff operated fourteen other service stations); see also Coastland Corp. v. Third National Mortgage Co., 611 F.2d 969, 978 (4th Cir.1979) (denying damage award based on projected profits from sales of condominium units even where plaintiff had been in real estate development business for at least four years). The new software project was a new endeavor, as evidenced by the testimony of Objective’s president who stated that “the type of technolog[y] ... had never been done before.” The project’s profitability depended on many factors, including the state of the market and the success of the marketing strategy; the industry’s acceptance of SATO’s entry into the commercial market, where its clientele had previously been limited to the government; and future negotiations. Indeed, it cannot be certain that there would have been any profits at all. See Coastland, 611 F.2d at 978 (noting that where the business or venture is new, “the anticipated profits from such business, cannot be recovered as an item of damages because it cannot be rendered reasonably certain that there would have been any profits at all from the conduct of the business”). Accordingly, the district court properly dismissed the breach of contract counterclaim, since Objective only sought uncertain, lost profits from its new venture with SATO. Such damages are not recoverable under Virginia law.
B. Judgment as a Matter of Law Against Objective’s Counterclaim for Fraud
Appellant Objective maintains that, in order to induce it to agree to a low, fixed price, SATO indicated that: (1) it was on a limited budget of less than $1 million; (2) Objective would get “very good visibility” from producing the software product; (3) Objective would be identified as the developer and get “hundreds of millions of dollars;” (4) SATO would give Objective lots of exposure if Objective produced a simulation of the software system for exhibition at the industry trade show; and (5) the product and its derivatives would be jointly marketed to third parties, with SATO and Objective dividing the revenue evenly. Objective maintains that it relied on these allegedly fraudulent representations and suffered substantial damages as a result. The district court disagreed and, at the close of evidence, entered judgment as a matter of law against Objective. The court observed that Objective’s allegations “really amount to nothing more as a matter of law, than the negotiations for entry into this contract.”
Under Virginia law, “fraudulent inducement to perform may arise when one party induces the other to perform by concealing some fact which excuses performance by the latter.” Ware v. Scott, 220 Va. 317, 257 S.E.2d 855, 857 (1979). With this standard in mind and assuming the veracity of Objective’s claims, even if SATO had revealed that their budget for the software project was unlimited, that fact would not excuse Objective’s performance of its contractual obligations. Informed of certain budgetary constraints, Objective was free to accept or decline the project based on its own ability to produce the desired product. It opted to accept the project and proposed terms that included a low, fixed price for its services. There was no fraudulent inducement, as contemplated by the Virginia Supreme Court in Ware.
Furthermore, trial and deposition testimony established that the simulation at the trade show displayed Objective’s logo, as Objective designed it. There is no indication from the record that SATO promised anything more to Objective. Any statements that Objective would receive “enormous exposure” or “very good visibility” from producing the simulation or the software systems were expressions of opinion that, as a matter of law, cannot form the basis for fraud. See Watson v. Avon Street Business Center, Inc., 226 Va. 614, 311 S.E.2d 795, 798 (1984) (holding that statement by sellers’ agent that warehouse had “a good roof’ was an expression of opinion insufficient to constitute fraud). Our conclusion is buttressed by the fact that the record reflects no agreement or discussion as to how SATO would ensure the “enormous exposure” or “very good visibility.” There was no misrepresentation of a material fact and, thus, no fraud.
Finally, Objective’s claim that it had an oral agreement with SATO to market the software jointly and divide the revenue evenly is contradicted by the express language of the Agreement. The Agreement provides:
Promptly following the execution of this Agreement, the parties shall commence negotiations regarding a mutually acceptable marketing arrangement that would grant Developer [Objective] the non-exclusive right to sublicense the System to Third Parties on terms and conditions which would be agreed to by the parties.
The Agreement further provides:
This Agreement ... constitutes the entire agreement between the parties hereto with respect to the transactions contemplated herein, and it supersedes all prior oral or written agreements, commitments or understandings with respect to the matters provided for herein.
Even if the parties had agreed to market the software jointly and share the revenue, any discussion is superseded by the written contract that both parties signed. While the Agreement does call for the commencement of “negotiations [between the parties] regarding a mutually acceptable marketing arrangement,” since neither SATO nor Objective attempted to initiate such negotiations, it would be inappropriate to label SATO’s inaction fraudulent.
Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Objective, there is no evidence in the record on which a reasonable jury could find that SATO committed fraud. The district court, therefore, properly granted judgment as a matter of law against Objective’s counterclaim.
C. Suvimary Judgment Against Objective’s LanhamAct Counterclaim
Objective argues that SATO misrepresented to prospective 

[truncated for spike corpus]