Case: Price v. Stossel
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
Date: 2010-08-24
Citation: 620 F.3d 992
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 3781194

SCHROEDER, Circuit Judge:
Journalists and publishers risk a defamation action when they put words in a public figure’s mouth. The New Yorker magazine learned this to its chagrin in Masson v. New Yorker Magazine, Inc., 501 U.S. 496, 111 S.Ct. 2419, 115 L.Ed.2d 447 (1991). The issue in this case is whether there are similar risks when a network television program broadcasts a statement actually made by a public figure, but presents the statement in a misleading context, thereby changing the viewer’s understanding of the speaker’s words.
The plaintiff public figure in this case is Dr. Frederick Price, a minister known for his television evangelism. Defendants are American Broadcasting Companies, Inc. (“ABC”) and others involved in the production of the news program “20/20,” including correspondent John Stossel, producer Glenn Ruppel, and televangelist critics Ole Anthony and Trinity Foundation, Inc., who allegedly provided the original footage of Price to the network. The primary statement in question comes from a film clip (“the Clip”) of Price delivering a sermon, in which Price says: “I live in a 25-room mansion. I have my own $6 million yacht. I have my own private jet, and I have my own helicopter, and I have seven luxury automobiles.” ABC broadcast the Clip suggesting that Price was boasting about his own wealth, which is substantial. In fact, however, the Clip was excerpted from part of a longer sermon in which Price was speaking from the perspective of a hypothetical person who, though wealthy, was spiritually unfulfilled. After ABC broadcast a retraction acknowledging the mistake, this lawsuit ensued.
The district court dismissed Price’s defamation action as frivolous under California’s anti-Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation (“anti-SLAPP”) statute, California Code of Civil Procedure § 425.16(b)(1), which provides for early dismissal of suits that threaten defendants’ right of expression under the First Amendment. The district court concluded that Price could not prove that Defendants’ broadcast of the Clip was “false” within the meaning of defamation law, because the plaintiff had elsewhere made similar statements about his own wealth.
We conclude, for the reasons explained more fully below, that the district court’s dismissal of the suit under the antiSLAPP statute was premature. The district court erroneously compared the statements in the Clip with Price’s actual wealth and possessions, agreeing with Defendants that the Clip was “substantially true.” Under Masson, however, when dealing with material that is portrayed as a quotation, we are to compare the quotation as published with the words the speaker actually said. See 501 U.S. at 502, 111 S.Ct. 2419. Where the published quotation contains a material alteration of the meaning conveyed by the speaker, the published quotation is false. Id. at 517, 111 S.Ct. 2419. Here, the context in which Price’s words were presented materially changed the words’ meaning. Because Price has a reasonable possibility of proving that the Clip, as broadcast, was false, and because Defendants relied exclusively on the issue of non-falsity in their motion to dismiss under the anti-SLAPP statute, we must reverse the dismissal of the express defamation claim and remand. We express no opinion as to whether Price can satisfy the remaining elements of a defamation claim or whether there were any damages. We affirm the district court’s dismissal of Price’s implied defamation claims.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
In 1973, Price founded the Crenshaw Christian Center/Ever Increasing Faith Ministry (“the Church”), which presently claims a congregation of over 22,000 members. For decades, Price has televised his sermons through his “Ever Increasing Faith” television programs. Price preaches a theology known as the “prosperity gospel,” which emphasizes God’s generosity, particularly financial generosity, and the ability of believers to claim that generosity for themselves.
As a self-proclaimed “prophet of prosperity,” Price touts his own prosperity in his preaching, books, audio recordings, and public statements. Price is indeed wealthy. The undisputed evidence establishes that Price owns an 8,000 square foot house worth $4.6 million, travels around the world in a private Gulfstream jet owned by the Church, owns a Rolls Royce, wears an $8,500 watch, and serves as Chief Executive Officer of the Church, which Price describes as a $40 million corporation.
On March 23, 2007, ABC broadcast a program entitled “Enough” on its news show “20/20.” The program, hosted by ABC news correspondent John Stossel, featured seven individuals who had taken personal, moral stances on a variety of topics, including children’s behavior in restaurants, the price of basketball shoes, politicians’ practice of naming buildings after themselves, children born out of wedlock, earmarks for local interests, and treatment of animals by law enforcement. The portion of the program at issue in this case was a report on wealthy preachers, as investigated by a non-profit watchdog group dedicated to improving the transparency and accountability of Christian ministries. ABC promoted the report using teasers and a mini-report on “Good Morning America,” which included excerpts of the full-length report as well as silent footage from the Clip of Price’s sermon, with voice-overs by news presenters pitching the report. It is the contents of the report, mini-report, and teasers that give rise to Price’s defamation action.
The following is a narrative of the seven-minute report, drawn largely from the district court’s description. The Clip at issue is emphasized:
The report begins with a question posed by Stossel: “They preach the gospel of giving to God. But how much of what you give do they keep for themselves? Is it time for someone to say ‘enough’?” Stossel then states, “[mjaybe they will do great things with your money.” Subsequently, the report shows audiovisual clips of several ministers, not including Price.
The report then turns to a brief interview with a member of Price’s congregation, who states that she believes her “money is being put to excellent use, without one question.” Stossel continues, “[ajnd yet her pastor, Fred Pnce, boasts that ... [cutting to an audiovisual clip of Plaintiff]: 7 live in a 25-room mansion. I have my own $6 million yacht. I have my own private jet, and I have my own helicopter, and I have seven luxury automobiles’ ” Stossel states, “At least he tells people about it, but many preachers don’t advertise how well they live.” The report then runs video clips of other ministers who are identified as less forthcoming about their wealth. Stossel explains that some of these other ministers “point out that they comply with all IRS regulations.” The report then turns to the featured guest, who states that complying with all IRS regulations is “not good enough.” The featured guest, Rusty Leonard, is the founder of Ministry Watch, an organization created to improve fiscal transparency of ministries and charities. Stossel presents him as “a deeply religious man who invests and lectures about investing in companies that he believes have Christian-friendly values.” Stossel reports that Leonard left a lucrative Wall Street career “because he thought it was un-Christian [for ministers, including Price to] ask donors for money but [not] reveal how they spend it.” During Stossel’s voiceover, images of 10 different ministers flash across the screen. Price’s image appears for approximately one second. Stossel then states, “[Leonard] says donors are being hosed.” The report then cuts to Stossel interviewing Leonard. Stossel asks Leonard about how he knows donors are being hosed. Leonard states, “You’re being hosed if you don’t know.”
Turning to a clip of a Ministry Watch employee, the report shows how Ministry Watch asks ministries to reveal their finances. A Ministry Watch employee is shown making a call in an office: “We sent you a letter a couple of weeks ago requesting your organization’s latest 990,” she says. Stossel explains, “They ask Christian ministries and charities to reveal their finances.” Stossel asks Leonard: “So you call up and say, ‘Hi, I’d like to know where your money’s going,’ and they say, ‘Go to Hell’?” Leonard laughs and answers, “Essentially. Especially the bad guys, right? Nobody had ever held them to account from an independent perspective, right? So they were totally freaked out by it.” Stossel then remarks how some of the people have threatened to sue Leonard, to which Leonard responds: “Bring it on,” and explains that all he gets are threats, not real lawsuits. Stossel then explains that “[w]hile most charities legally must report their finances, ministries are exempt.”
Stossel reports that Ministry Watch has criticized approximately 28 religious groups for not revealing how they spend donations. At this point, an image of Ministry Watch’s “Transparency List” flashes on the screen for approximately five seconds, showing the names of approximately 11 ministries, including Price’s “Ever Increasing Faith” television ministry. Stossel then identifies specific ministers, not including Price, as televangelists whom Ministry Watch has criticized for'being secretive and having little or no financial transparency. Leonard states that people should not donate to such ministries because they are not open about how they spend donations. Leonard also notes that the lack of openness “does not mean that [the ministries are] doing anything wrong,” although it indicates a “very high probability that something is wrong there.”
Leonard states that, as indicated on the website MinistryWatch.com, there are “good guys” (Shining Light Ministries) and “bad guys” (Donor Alerts) in the religious fundraising arena, and that there are “a lot more good guys than there are bad guys.” Stossel reports Leonard’s belief that “the vast majority” of ministries “do a good job and spend your money well.” Stossel continues by stating that Leonard, however, remains critical of televangelists who own multimillion dollar homes in gated communities and travel the world in multi-million dollar jets.
Leonard states that the leadership of the ministries should, like Jesus, maintain some degree of sacrifice. Leonard then states that the ministers that he criticizes do “some good works, but they could spend a whole lot more money if they sold the house and the car and the jet plane.” The report then discusses another televangelist, whose improved financial transparency earned praise from Leonard. The report ends with the conclusion of Leonard’s interview.
Following ABC’s broadcast of the report, Price demanded a retraction on the ground that the Clip, which suggested that Price was speaking about his own wealth, was taken out of context. In the actual sermon from which the Clip was excerpted, Price was telling a parable of unhappiness brought about by a lack of faith, and he was speaking from the perspective of a hypothetical man. In response, on May 11, 2007, ABC broadcast a retraction on “Good Morning America” and “20/20,” and posted the retraction on its website. The retraction, narrated by John Stossel, aired as follows:
Now I want to correct a mistake we made. Several weeks ago, in a story about the financial openness of Christian ministries, we heard this clip of televangelist Frederick Price.
[Replay of the Clip.]
We thought Dr. Price, founder of Crenshaw Christian Center, was talking about himself, but we later learned he was preaching a sermon about a hypothetical person who had many material possessions but lived a spiritually unfulfilled life. We’d used his quote out of context, and for that, we apologize to Dr. Price and the Crenshaw Christian Center. And we apologize to you if we misled you. Also, the Center sent us a statement saying Dr. Price is paid, quote, “a salary commensurate with his duties” and that the church, quote, “openly shares its financial information with its congregation.”
This litigation followed.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Price first filed a defamation action against Defendants in Los Angeles County Superior Court in July 2007. Defendants removed to federal court on the basis of diversity jurisdiction. The parties then agreed to dismissal of the complaint without prejudice in an attempt to resolve the dispute through mediation. When mediation failed, Price filed the complaint again, this time in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. Defendants moved for a change of venue, claiming that Price had filed in New York in an attempt to avoid California’s anti-SLAPP statute. The New York court granted Defendants’ motion, citing “Price’s apparent — albeit unsuccessful — forum shopping,” and transferred the action back to the Central District of California. Price’s amended complaint alleged defamation and intentional infliction of emotional distress, and sought compensatory, general, and punitive damages.
Once the case returned to California, Defendants moved to strike the amended complaint under the anti-SLAPP statute. Under California law, defamation “involves the intentional publication of a statement of fact which is false, unprivileged, and has a natural tendency to injure or which causes special damage.” Gilbert v. Sykes, 147 Cal.App.4th 13, 53 Cal. Rptr.3d 752, 764 (2007) (internal quotation marks omitted). Defendants’ motion to strike addressed only falsity. Defendants’ motion argued that the broadcast Clip was not false, and that the suit should therefore be dismissed. Defendants explicitly reserved their right to challenge the remaining elements of Price’s defamation claim, such as actual malice and special damages, at a later stage in the proceedings.
Defendants’ motion was limited to falsity for tactical reasons apparent from the district court’s earlier published opinion on discovery. See Price v. Stossel, 590 F.Supp.2d 1262 (C.D.Cal.2008). Under California law, discovery is automatically stayed when a defendant files an antiSLAPP motion, unless the opposing party can demonstrate “good cause.” CaLCiv. Proc.Code § 425.16(g). Price had sought discovery on intent, but after Defendants gave notice they would file an anti-SLAPP motion, the district court denied Price’s motion to compel discovery, ruling that Pi'ice failed to show good cause because ABC’s intent was irrelevant to the antiSLAPP motion’s narrow focus on falsity. Price, 590 F. Supp 2d at 1270-71. Defendants’ focus on falsity thus avoided discovery as to their intent when they broadcast the Clip.
A few months later, the district court granted Defendants’ anti-SLAPP motion, concluding that Price could not establish a probability that he would prevail on his claims because he would not be able to establish falsity. The district court compared the assets listed in the Clip (a 25-room mansion, a $6 million yacht, a private jet, a helicopter, and seven luxury automobiles) with assets that Price actually enjoys, and concluded that the allegedly defamatory Clip was “substantially true.” The district court also dismissed the claim that the report implied criminal misconduct.
Price now appeals to this court. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We review de novo a district court’s decision to grant a motion to strike under California’s anti-SLAPP statute. Vess v. Ciba-Geigy Corp., USA, 317 F.3d 1097, 1102 (9th Cir.2003).
DISCUSSION
I. California’s Anti-SLAPP Statute
California’s anti-SLAPP statute permits courts at an early stage to dismiss meritless defamation cases “aimed at chilling expression through costly, time-consuming litigation.” Metabolife Int'l, Inc. v. Wornick, 264 F.3d 832, 839 (9th Cir.2001). The statute was passed in 1993 in response to the legislature’s concern that strategic defamation lawsuits were deterring citizens from exercising their political and legal rights. United States ex rel. Newsham v. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., 190 F.3d 963, 970 (9th Cir.1999) (citing W

[truncated for spike corpus]