Case: e360 Insight v. Spamhaus Project
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
Date: 2007-08-30
Citation: 500 F.3d 594
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 3699518

RIPPLE, Circuit Judge.
e360 Insight, LLC, and David Linhardt (collectively, “e360”) brought this action in the Cook County Circuit Court, alleging various tort claims against The Spamhaus Project (“Spamhaus”). Spamhaus removed the case to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois. Spamhaus answered the complaint and then, one month later, in open court, moved to withdraw its answer. The court granted that motion, as well as a motion by Spamhaus’ counsel to withdraw. Because Spamhaus had elected not to defend the action, the court also entered a default, issued a preliminary injunction and requested evidence from e360 to support a default judgment against Spamhaus. Upon receiving e360’s response, the court entered judgment, awarding to e360 $11,715,000 in damages, plus costs, and a permanent injunction. Spamhaus, then represented by new counsel, challenged the judgment in a Rule 60(b) motion to the district court. That motion was denied. Spamhaus timely appeals both the default judgment and the district court’s denial of its Rule 60(b) motion. For the reasons stated in this opinion, we affirm the entry of a default judgment, but vacate the award of damages and injunctive relief and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I
BACKGROUND
A. Facts
Spamhaus is a non-profit company limited by guarantee and organized under the laws of the United Kingdom. It is an internet watchdog group in the business of identifying and blocking internet “spam,” or unsolicited bulk e-mail. In that capacity, it maintains the “Register Of Known Spam Operations” (“ROKSO”), a “3 strikes list” for internet users it believes are responsible for creating and distributing spam messages. R.l, Ex. A at 4. Through the ROKSO, Spamhaus publishes a sort of blacklist of persons or businesses that have been thrown off a minimum of three internet service providers (“ISPs”) for violating the terms of use of the ISP; Spam-haus classifies persons or entities who have had at least “three strikes” as “spammers.” Although the process is not entirely clear from the record, it appears that ISPs can access Spamhaus’ ROKSO list (either directly or through the use of other anti-spam databases into which the ROK-SO is integrated); if an ISP then elects, it can employ the ROKSO as part of its own screening process for incoming messages directed to its customers — its “spam filter.” That is, an ISP could see that a particular internet protocol (“IP”) address had been marked as a spammer on Spam-haus’ ROKSO and then, as a result, might refuse to allow a message sent from that IP address to reach the e-mail’s intended recipient.
e360 is an internet marketing company operated by David Linhardt out of Wheeling, Illinois. e360 maintains that, at the time it was listed on the ROKSO, it never had been excluded by an ISP. It also claims that it operates in accordance with ISP terms of use and within all applicable laws. e360 uses e-mail to market products for other businesses. The value of its service to the businesses it represents lies in its ability to reach potential individual customers for those businesses via e-mail.
In December 2003, Spamhaus placed e360 Insight, LLC, and Mr. Linhardt on the ROKSO list. e360 claims that it contacted Spamhaus to inform it that a mistake had been made, but nevertheless it remains on the ROKSO list. e360 also claims that Spamhaus cross-lists businesses who partner with companies and individuals on the ROKSO list and refuses to remove these partners from the blacklist until they terminate their relationship with the primary spammer on the ROKSO list.
B. District Court Proceedings
e360 brought this action in state court, claiming that Spamhaus was liable in tort for losses e360 suffered as a result of its placement on the ROKSO. Specifically, the complaint alleged that Spamhaus’ placing e360 on the ROKSO list amounted to tortious interference with contractual relations, tortious interference with prospective economic advantage, defamation per se and defamation quod. It sought compensatory and punitive damages, as well as an injunction requiring Spamhaus both to remove e360 from the list and to place a notice on the Spamhaus website that e360 had been included on the ROKSO list in error.
Spamhaus removed the case to the district court on the basis of diversity of citizenship. Spamhaus then answered the complaint on July 21, 2006. In that answer, it denied many of e360’s allegations and asserted fourteen affirmative defenses. Among those defenses were lack of personal jurisdiction, insufficient process and insufficient service of process. R.6 at 8.
On August 23, 2006, counsel for both sides appeared before the district court at a status call. The court began addressing the issue of diversity of citizenship when then-counsel for Spamhaus interrupted the court and the following exchange ensued:
MR. BROWN [then-counsel for Spam-haus]: Your Honor, if I may, before we get too far down what we are talking about here today, I have been authorized by my client to do precisely two things here this morning; and, I do acknowledge that it is a bit of an unconventional maneuver. My client wants to—
THE COURT: You represent who?
MR. BROWN: The defendant—
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. BROWN: Spamhaus.
And my client wants to participate in the defense no further.
I am not authorized to do anything more today than to ask this Court that the answer be withdrawn; and, then, once we hear from this Court on that, to get a ruling on our motion to withdraw as counsel.
[the Court engages counsel for the plaintiffs.]
THE COURT: All right.
Do you know whether your client has another law firm in hand or what their position is?
MR. BROWN: My position — or my understanding — from them is that they want to do absolutely nothing.
So, I don’t know for certain—
THE COURT: Do they want to lose?
I mean, that is what is on the horizon if they want to do nothing. You have to defend the case.
MR. BROWN: They have been fully informed of the fact that the default judgment is a real possibility. And they are aware of that and are prepared to take that risk.
[exchange regarding motion to withdraw as counsel] THE COURT: Okay.
Here is what we are going to do. I am going to give you leave to withdraw the answer; I am going to give you leave to withdraw; and, in light of the fact that your client is aware of that— and, apparently, has sent no one here to disagree with the request to withdraw; and, I assume you told them it was a dead- — bang certainty that default is going to be entered without any resistance to the lawsuit — I am going to enter a default order today.
[court reinstates TRO entered in state court]
THE COURT: [granting the motion to withdraw as counsel]
And I will ask you, as your, if not your final act, at least approaching finality, to let you[r] client know what happened this morning. And tell them it is not just a risk that they will lose the case, but it is a dead-bang certainty. And the first step has been undertaken with the entry of a default.
But no judgment, just a default. Okay?
R.56-1 at 2-3, 6-7.
A week later, e360 filed a motion for a default judgment, supported by an affidavit from Mr. Linhardt that stated the amounts in which he believed his business had been harmed by being placed on the ROKSO. On September 13, 2006, the district court entered judgment and awarded the full amount of compensatory damages stated in Mr. Linhardt’s affidavit, $11,715,000.00, as well as $1,917.50 in costs. It denied attorney’s fees and punitive damages. The court also entered a permanent injunction, the details of which we shall examine shortly.
Spamhaus filed a timely Rule 60(b) motion to vacate the default and the default judgment. At the hearing on that motion, new counsel for Spamhaus articulated several bases for the motion. First, Spam-haus reasserted its challenge to “the fundamental power of the Court to exercise jurisdiction for default or other purposes over a UK-based Internet company.” R.56-4 at 7. According to Spamhaus, that defense could be “independently raise[d], [and] ha[d] nothing to do with whether the attorney appeared ... or not. Because when they did appear, they properly asserted these defenses.” Id. at 7. Spam-haus also advised the district court that it had received conflicting legal advice and that its instruction that prior counsel withdraw was based on a misunderstanding of the applicable law. Finally, Spamhaus raised various objections to the propriety of the specific relief awarded. The district court gave the following response:
I do not think there was anything unknowing or unintentional about the decision made not to defend this case once it got over here at some point....
... [T]he idea that Rule 60 accommodates at least what may have seemed at the time an intelligent decision — and an intentional one — should be used to reopen the consequence of the decision, knowingly made, I am not sure that is what Rule 60 is about.
Secondly, yes, we do have to have jurisdiction over subject matter, as well as the person or presence of a defendant in the first instance. There is no question about that.
That was apparently, you say, pressed by way of an affirmative defense — or, at least, it was suggested as an affirmative defense, but not pressed.
We do not undertake to take one side of a case and look for, as meticulously as we can, for holes in the conduct of the party seeking some relief because the other side has failed to defend this case, or at least chose to abandon the defense of the case.
So, I think it would be unfair to the plaintiff at this point to, if you will, pretend as if none of these things took place before; no opportunity to defend this case; no decision made to knowingly abandon the defense; and, then, start over and give somebody a brand new track.
Id. at 8-10. Although briefing was requested by Spamhaus, the court immediately denied the motion.
Spamhaus timely appealed both the entry of default judgment and the denial of its Rule 60(b) motion to vacate that judgment.
II
DISCUSSION
Spamhaus raises many challenges to the district court’s entry of default judgment, the character of the relief awarded and the failure of the court to grant its Rule 60(b) motion and to reopen for factual development certain of the issues decided in the default. Specifically, Spamhaus challenges the district court’s authority to enter a default judgment without affirmatively inquiring into the factual basis for personal jurisdiction and effective service. Spam-haus also claims that it may assert lack of jurisdiction and improper service in this court and be relieved of the default judgment. On the question of the specific relief awarded, Spamhaus challenges the district court’s calculation of damages based on Mr. Linhardt’s affidavit alone. It also challenges the grant of injunctive relief and claims that, as written, the injunction violates the First Amendment and is over-broad.
A. Validity of the Default
We review both the district court’s decision to enter a default judgment and the denial of a motion to vacate the judgment for an abuse of discretion. Homer v. Jones-Bey, 415 F.3d 748, 753 (7th Cir.2005).
1. Personal Jurisdiction and Service
Default judgments rendered without personal jurisdiction are void and, therefore, we shall “set aside a default judgment as a per se abuse of discretion if the district court that entered the judgment lacked jurisdiction.” Swaim v. Moltan Co., 73 F.3d 711, 716 (7th Cir.1996); see also Homer, 415 F.3d at 753; Robinson Eng’g Co. Pension Plan & Trust v. George, 223 F.3d 445, 448 (7th Cir.2000); Bally Export Corp. v. Balicar, Ltd., 804 F.2d 398, 400 (7th Cir.1986).
In support of its argument that the judgment is void, Spamhaus contends that the district court abused its discretion in entering judgment without first conducting an affirmative inquiry into whether it had personal jurisdiction over Spamhaus and whether service of process was effected in compliance with applicable rules. Spam-haus concedes that this court has not imposed an affirmative duty on the district court to inquire into the factual bases for jurisdiction or service prior to entering a default. Instead, at oral argument, Spam-haus asked this court to craft a special rule, applicable in cases involving a foreign, not-for-profit, internet-based defendant. Such a rule is justified, claims Spamhaus, by the emerging jurisprudence on internet-based entities and personal jurisdiction and by a series of other cases in which other courts have imposed such a duty in cases involving foreign defendants.
The cases on which Spamhaus relies involve foreign defendants who had not appeared in the action. See Dennis Garberg & Assocs., Inc. v. Pack-Tech Int’l Corp., 115 F.3d 767, 772 (10th Cir.1997) (“[A] district court must determine whether it has jurisdiction over the defendant before entering judgment by default against a party who has not appeared in the case.” (emphasis added)). We need not decide whether we would impose the same rule on district courts in this circuit if faced with that situation because it is not the one we face here: Spamhaus removed the case, actually appeared through counsel in federal court and filed an answer specifically challenging personal jurisdiction.
We see no reason to require the district court to raise sua sponte affirmative defenses, which may, of course, be waived or forfeited, on behalf of an appearing party who elects not to pursue those defenses for itself. See TruServ Corp. v. Flegles, Inc., 419 F.3d 584, 589 (7th Cir.2005) (noting that personal jurisdiction may be waived). For similar reasons, we do not believe that the district court was obligated to consider the validity of the judgment on jurisdictional grounds in its ruling on the Rule 60(b) motion. Nor do we see any reason why this court should reexamine the issue of personal jurisdiction. We acknowledge that under Rule 60(b)(4), a party generally may challenge a default judgment as void for lack of personal jurisdiction at any time. See Swaim, 73 F.3d at 717 (noting that this rule “recognizes that it is unfair to strip parties of a defense that may explain the omission that is potentially the basis for judgment against them”). However, that general rule does not preserve in perpetuity a party’s claim regarding personal jurisdiction, regardless of any strategy it pursues in the district court.
As is clear from its oral ruling on Spam-haus’ 60(b) motion, the district court interpreted its conduct preceding default as a waiver of the previously asserted defenses. See R.56-4 at 10 (noting that the court would not “pretend as if none of these things took place ... [and there had been] no opportunity to defend this ease[,] no decision made to knowingly abandon the defense”); id. at 8-9 (“[T]he idea that Rule 60 accommodates at least what may have seemed at the time an intelligent decision- — -and an intentional one — should be used to reopen the consequence of the decision, knowingly made, I am not sure that is what Rule 60 is about.... [Spam-haus] chose to abandon the defense of the case.”). We review the factual determinations upon which a district court predicates a finding of waiver for clear error and the legal question of whether the conduct amounts to waiver de novo. Ernst & Young LLP v. Baker O’Neal Holdings, Inc., 304 F.3d 753, 756 (7th Cir.2002).
We perceive no error in the district court’s conclusion that Spamhaus intentionally elected to abandon its available defenses when it withdrew those defenses from consideration by the court and indicated that it was prepared to accept a default. Spamhaus’ then-counsel confirmed that it wished to “participate in the defense no further” and “do absolutely nothing.” See R.56-1 at 3, 5. It was not erroneous to treat this kind of voluntary abandonment of defenses, raised but not pursued, as a waiver. See Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 464, 58 S.Ct. 1019, 82 L.Ed. 1

[truncated for spike corpus]