Case: MEMC Electronic Materials, Inc. v. Mitsubishi Materials Silicon Corp.
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
Date: 2005-08-22
Citation: 420 F.3d 1369
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 8944625

SCHALL, Circuit Judge.
MEMC Electronic Materials, Inc. (“MEMC”) is the assignee of record of U.S. Patent No. 5,919,302 (the “ ’302 patent”). It brought suit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California against Mitsubishi Materials Silicon Corporation, Mitsubishi Silicon America Corporation, Sumitomo Mitsubishi Silicon Corporation (“SUMCO Corp.”), Sumco USA Corporation (“SUM-CO USA”), and Sumco USA Sales Corporation (“SUMCO USA Sales”) (collectively, “defendants” or “SUMCO”). In its suit, MEMC alleged direct infringement of the ’302 patent under 35 U.S.C. § 271(a) and inducement of infringement of the patent under 35 U.S.C. § 271(b). The district court eventually granted summary judgment in favor of defendants on the ground that, as a matter of law, they could not be liable for either direct infringement or inducement of infringement. MEMC Elec. Materials, Inc. v. Mitsubishi Materials Silicon Corp., No. 4:01-CV-04925 (N.D.Cal. Mar. 16, 2004) (“Summary Judgment Order”). As far as direct infringement was concerned, the court ruled that there was no evidence of sales or offers for sale of accused products in the United States. As far as inducement of infringement was concerned, the court ruled that MEMC had failed to produce any evidence of inducement of infringement by defendants. MEMC now appeals that decision. At the same time, defendants cross-appeal the district court’s denial of their motion for attorney’s fees, expert witness fees, and expenses.
We see no error in the grant of summary judgment with respect to direct infringement. However, in view of what we think are genuine issues of material fact, we hold the district court did err in granting summary judgment with respect to inducement of infringement. Accordingly, with respect to MEMC’s appeal, the judgment of the district court is affirmed-in-part and reversed-in-part and the case is remanded to the district court for further proceedings. On the cross-appeal, we affirm the denial of defendants’ request for attorney’s fees.
I.
MEMC is a supplier of silicon wafers to the semiconductor industry. The ’302 patent, entitled “Low Defect Density Vacancy Dominated Silicon,” relates to the preparation of semiconductor grade single crystal silicon, which is used, in wafer form, in the manufacture of electronic components such as integrated circuits. ’302 patent col. 1, 11. 9-16. Prior art methods of manufacturing single crystal silicon often resulted in crystals containing large quantities of agglomerated intrinsic point defects. Id. col. 1,11. 18-55. These defects can severely impact the yield potential of silicon wafers in complex and highly integrated circuits. Id. col. 1, 11. 53-55. The patent discloses a method of preparing single crystal silicon that is substantially free of agglomerated intrinsic point defects. Specifically, the ’302 patent discloses a process specifying initial growth conditions and the temperature range of the manufacturing process. Id. col. 3,1. 62 — col. 4,1.14.
Claim 1, the only asserted independent claim of the ’302 patent, states as follows:
1. A single crystal silicon wafer having a central axis, a front side and a back side which are generally perpendicular to the central axis, a circumferential edge, and a radius extending from the central axis to the circumferential edge of the wafer, the wafer comprising
a first axially symmetric region in which vacancies are the predominant intrinsic point defect and which is substantially free of agglomerated vacancy intrinsic point defects wherein the first axially symmetric region comprises the central axis or has a width of at least about 15 mm.
’302 patent col. 23,11.17-23.
SUMCO, like MEMC, is a supplier of silicon wafers to the semiconductor industry. It is undisputed that SUMCO’s silicon wafers are manufactured exclusively outside of the United States at SUMCO’s manufacturing plant in Yonezawa, Japan. Ostensibly, SUMCO sells silicon wafers to Samsung Japan Corporation (“Samsung Japan”), which then sells the wafers to Samsung Austin Semiconductor, located in Austin, Texas (“Samsung Austin”).
On December 14, 2001, MEMC sued SUMCO in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, claiming that SUMCO was liable for infringement and inducement of infringement of the ’302 patent based upon SUM-CO’s alleged sale and importation of certain silicon wafers. MEMC asserted that SUMCO directly infringed the ’302 patent under 35 U.S.C. § 271(a) by offering to sell and selling the accused wafers to Samsung Austin. With respect to its claim of inducement of infringement under 35 U.S.C. § 271(b), MEMC asserted that SUMCO encouraged and enabled Samsung Austin to use the accused wafers by manufacturing wafers according to Samsung Korea’s specifications and by providing technical support to the Samsung Austin facility.
II.
On December 3, 2003, SUMCO filed a motion for summary judgment of zero damages, arguing that MEMC could not prove that defendants committed the alleged acts of infringement within the United States. SUMCO argued that it did not sell the accused wafers either directly or indirectly to Samsung Austin, and that it only sold the accused wafers to Samsung Japan. SUMCO also argued that it had not engaged in any conduct that would constitute the active inducement of infringement by Samsung Austin in the United States.
MEMC responded that Samsung Japan was merely a conduit for the delivery of defendants’ accused wafers and that Samsung Austin was SUMCO’s true customer. MEMC also argued that defendants induced Samsung Austin’s infringement of the ’302 patent by manufacturing wafers according to Samsung Austin’s specifications and by providing substantial technical support to Samsung Austin.
On March 16, 2004, the district court granted defendants’ summary judgment motion. The court held that MEMC had failed to produce any evidence of sales or offers for sales of the accused wafers in the United States by defendants or any evidence of importation of the accused wafers into the United States by defendants. Summary Judgment Order, slip op. at 2. The court also held that, vis-a-vis Samsung Austin, MEMC had failed to provide any evidence of active and intentional inducement of infringement by defendants. Id. On April 22, 2004, the district court entered final judgment of non-infringement. Under these circumstances, the court reasoned, MEMC could not establish entitlement to any damages. Id. On May 20, 2004, SUMCO filed a motion for attorney’s fees, expert witness fees, and expenses. The district court denied this motion on July 9, 2004. MEMC Elec. Materials, Inc. v. Mitsubishi Materials Silicon Corp., No. 4:01-CV-04925 (N.D.Cal. July 9, 2004) (“Attorney’s Fees Order ”).
MEMC appeals the district court’s final determination of non-infringement as well as the underlying order granting SUMCO summary judgment of zero damages. SUMCO cross-appeals the district court’s denial of its motion for attorney’s fees, expert witness fees, and expenses. We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1295(a)(1).
DISCUSSION
I.
Summary judgment is appropriate only if, when the facts are viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and all doubts are resolved against the movant, there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R.Civ.P. 56(c); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247-48, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986); see also Caterpillar, Inc. v. Deere & Co., 224 F.3d 1374, 1379 (Fed.Cir.2000) (“When ruling on a motion for summary judgment, all of the nonmovant’s evidence is to be credited, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in the nonmovant’s favor.”). The movant carries the initial burden of proving that there are no genuine issues of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-24, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 (1986). If the movant shows a prima facie case for summary judgment, then the burden of production shifts to the nonmovant to present specific evidence indicating there is a genuine issue for trial. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 250, 106 S.Ct. 2505. This court reviews de novo the district court’s finding that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact regarding infringement. Amgen, Inc. v. Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc., 314 F.3d 1313, 1339 (Fed.Cir.2003).
The district court based its ruling of non-infringement on MEMC’s inability to establish damages for infringement and, thus, did not address the issue of claim coverage with respect to the ’302 patent. Accordingly, we assume for purposes of this appeal that the asserted claims of the ’302 patent read on the accused wafers. We turn first to the issue of direct infringement.
II.
The following facts are not in dispute: SUMCO sells the accused silicon wafers to Samsung Japan, which then sells the wafers to Samsung Austin. As noted above, the wafers are manufactured exclusively outside of the United States at SUMCO’s manufacturing plant in Yoneza-wa, Japan. SUMCO manufactures the accused wafers according to specifications provided by, and pursuant to a license from, Samsung Korea. Typically, Samsung Japan sends SUMCO an electronic purchase order specifying the number of wafers to be manufactured. At some point after the purchase order is received, SUM-CO processes the order and manufactures the wafers. The wafers then are packed in boxes at the Yonezawa plant and delivered at Yonezawa to a packaging company. SUMCO attaches a packaging label that indicates the destination of the wafers to be Austin, Texas. The packaging company, in turn, transports the boxes to its own facility for shipment, “free on board,” to Samsung Austin’s semiconductor fabrication plant in Austin, Texas.
Beyond these undisputed facts, MEMC directs our attention to evidence in the record from the summary judgment proceedings that it contends supports finding specific contacts between SUMCO and Samsung Austin. In support of its allegation of infringement, MEMC submitted a series of e-mails between SUMCO and an engineer at Samsung Austin. These emails suggest that SUMCO provides Samsung Austin with detailed electronic test data on the wafers for the purpose of obtaining Samsung Austin’s approval for shipment before SUMCO turns the wafers over to the packaging company for shipment to the United States. The engineer at Samsung Austin analyzes the test data upon receipt and, if the data indicates that the wafers are acceptable, the shipment is approved. These e-mails also suggest that SUMCO and Samsung Austin communicated directly and independently of Samsung Japan in order to coordinate shipment dates and the quantity of wafers sent in each shipment, subject to Samsung Austin’s final approval. In addition, the emails represent communications directly between Samsung Austin and SUMCO that address various problems Samsung Austin encountered with the wafers from time to time. These communications often resulted in adjustments made in the upstream manufacturing process at the SUMCO facility in Japan or adjustments made in the downstream process at the Samsung Austin facility in Austin, Texas.
The e-mail correspondence between employees of SUMCO and the engineer at Samsung Austin also reveals a transaction in November and December of 2002, during which SUMCO’s International Sales Manager, Toshihiro Awa, requested authorization from Samsung Austin for the shipment of a quantity of wafers with a modified edge-shape directly to Samsung Austin. The wafers were sent in response to certain problems with previously-supplied SUMCO wafers. Mr. Awa was granted authority from Samsung Austin’s purchasing manager to add these wafers to an existing Samsung Japan purchase order.
Finally, MEMC presented evidence suggesting that SUMCO personnel made several on-site visits to the Samsung Austin plant after issuance of the ’302 patent. First, MEMC pointed to the deposition testimony of Yoshihiro Wakisawa, an engineer at SUMCO. Mr. Wakisawa testified that he took two trips to the Samsung Austin facility in 2000 and 2001. Mr. Wak-isawa further testified that, during at least one of the trips, he made a technical presentation concerning the accused wafers. Second, MEMC cited the deposition testimony of Mr. Awa that he made multiple trips to the Samsung Austin facility, including one trip during 2000 or 2001 during which he made a technical presentation concerning the accused wafers.
III.
On appeal, MEMC argues that the district court erred in granting summary judgment of no direct infringement because the evidence of record demonstrates that SUMCO offers to sell and sells the accused silicon wafers to Samsung Austin in Austin, Texas. First, MEMC argues, SUMCO sells the accused wafers to Samsung Austin based on evidence that SUM-CO: (1) manufactures the accused wafers according to Samsung’s specifications; (2) e-mails Samsung Austin the test data for shipment authorization, (3) packages the wafers for shipment; (4) applies a shipping label for Samsung Austin in Austin, Texas; and (5) provides crucial follow-up technical support. Thus, SUMCO asserts that Samsung Japan’s “interposition in the purchase order process” does not change the fact that Samsung Austin is SUMCO’s “true” customer. MEMC cites N. Am. Philips Corp. v. Am. Vending Sales, Inc., 35 F.3d 1576 (Fed.Cir.1994), and Beverly Hills Fan Co. v. Royal Sovereign Corp., 21 F.3d 1558 (Fed.Cir.1994), for the proposition that the location of an infringing sale is either where the buyer is located or where a patentee suffers economic loss.
Second, according to MEMC, the transmittal of data from defendants to Samsung Austin constitutes an “offer to sell” the accused wafers within the meaning of section 271(a). MEMC states that, “[tjhrough these e-mails, SUMCO has communicated its willingness to ship to [Samsung Austin] a certain quantity of wafers (typically some subset of the total quantity identified in the electronic purchase order) on a certain date for the previously agreed to price, such wafers having the characteristics described by the voluminous data contained in the attached spreadsheets.” MEMC states in addition that if Samsung Austin replies to the email and accepts the tendered data, the bargain is concluded and SUMCO causes the wafers to be shipped to the United States. MEMC further states that SUM-CO’s e-mails generate interest in the accused wafers to the commercial detriment of MEMC — a result indicative of an infringing offer to sell.
SUMCO responds that the district court did not err in granting summary judgment that SUMCO does not directly infringe the ’302 patent under 35 U.S.C. § 271(a). This is so, according to SUMCO, because MEMC presented no evidence that SUM-CO sells or offers to sell the accused wafers in the United States. SUMCO asserts that the test data it sends to Samsung Austin is generated and sent after the accused wafers have been purchased and manufactured in Japan. Consequently, according to SUMCO, transmittal of this data cannot constitute an “offer to sell.” SUMCO states that e-mailing of this test data is done merely to allow Samsung Austin to confirm that the actual wafers satisfy Samsung’s specifications, i.e., the terms of the bargain already struck between Samsung Korea and SUMCO. Likewise, SUMCO asserts that the post-sale technical support it provides to Samsung Austin cannot qualify as a “sale” or “offer to sell” within the meaning of section 271(a) because this support occurs after the wafers have already been purchased and manufactured.
The question we are presented with in this case is whether SUMCO’s activities in the United States, as would be construed by a reasonable jury, are sufficient to establish an “offer for sale” or “sale” within the meaning of 35 U.S.C. § 271(a). Section 271(a) provides as follows:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, whoever without authority makes, uses, offers to sell, or sells any patented inven

[truncated for spike corpus]