Case: Kamara v. Attorney General
Court: United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
Date: 2005-08-29
Citation: 420 F.3d 202
Source: Caselaw Access Project (public domain), CAP id 8935475

OPINION OF THE COURT
SLOVITER, Circuit Judge.
The Department of Homeland Security (“DHS”) appeals the Order of the District Court granting Mohamed Kamara’s petition for writ of habeas corpus and permanently enjoining the government from deporting Kamara to Sierra Leone.
I.
Facts and Proceedings
The parties stipulated in a joint motion, filed on April 13, 2004, to the following facts: Kamara, a native of Sierra Leone, was studying medicine in Cuba in the early 1980s on a grant from the government of Sierra Leone. In the course of his studies in Cuba, the Sierra Leone government failed to provide the financial support it had promised. In response, Kamara and other Sierra Leone students stormed the Sierra Leone embassy in Cuba, physically accosted the Sierra Leonian Ambassador, and publicly accused the Sierra Leone government of corruption. Shortly thereafter, in 1982, Kamara was “deported” (expelled) from Cuba at the direction of officials of the Sierra Leone government, and required to return to Sierra Leone. While in transit through Miami, Florida on a non-immigrant transit visa, Kamara left the airport. He has remained in the United States ever since.
On April 23, 1999, Kamara was convicted in a New York State Court of attempted sale of a controlled substance (cocaine) in the third degree, and sentenced to six months incarceration. The conviction arose after undercover police officers approached Kamara and offered him $10 to help them buy cocaine. Kamara, who lived in a drug infested area, complied with the request and was thereafter arrested. On June 18, 1999, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (“INS”) (which has since been replaced by the Department of Homeland Security, Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement) commenced removal proceedings against Ka-mara on the grounds that he was an alien convicted of an aggravated felony as defined in 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(U), an alien convicted of violating a controlled substance law, and an alien who remained in the United States for a time longer than permitted. See 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii), (a)(2)(B)®, (a)(1)(B).
Kamara applied for asylum, withholding of removal under § 241(b)(3) of the Immigration and Naturalization Act (“INA”), 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(3), and for protection under the CAT. On February 25, 2000, the Immigration Judge (“IJ”) issued an oral opinion granting Kamara’s application for withholding of removal, reasoning that “in this case the widespread atrocities against people opposing the authority of the former government and present military rebel forces [the Revolutionary United Front (‘RUF’) ] indicates a greater chance, rather than a lesser chance that the respondent will be persecuted for who he is upon his return.” Supp.App. at 21. In the same oral decision, the IJ preterminated Kamara’s application for asylum, see 8 U.S.C. § 1158(b)(2)(A)(ii), (b)(2)(B)(i) (providing that an alien convicted of aggravated felony is not eligible for asylum), and held that given its decision to grant Ka-mara’s petition for withholding of removal, it was unnecessary to reach the CAT claim.
On October 31, 2000, the Bureau of Immigration Appeals (“BIA” or “Board”) reversed the decision of the IJ, stating that there is “insufficient evidence in the record to suggest that anyone in Sierra Leone would want to persecute [Kamara] for any complaints he made while a student in Cuba over 20 years ago.” J.A. at 19. The case was remanded to the IJ for consideration of whether Kamara was entitled to relief under the CAT.
At an evidentiary hearing held on January 19, 2001, the IJ heard additional testimony from Kamara, received testimony from Kamara’s niece, and accepted into evidence information about country conditions in Sierra Leone. The IJ found both Kamara and his niece credible, and thereafter, in a written opinion dated July 12, 2001, accepted their testimony as the facts of the case.
The testimonial and other evidence regarding country conditions revealed that as of January 2001, Sierra Leone was in the midst of a civil war. The RUF controlled two thirds of the country, and the government controlled the remaining one third. Each entity had an established record of grievous human rights violations.
The several country reports and various media publications (New York Times, Time Magazine, USA Today) received by the IJ made plain that “[t]here is hardly a ruling body in the world ... that matches the RUF and its allied forces for its utter inhumanity to people under its control.” J.A. at 26. The IJ, continuing reference to the country reports, stated that the rebel group, which was the military branch of the Sierra Leone government before the revolution, has killed thousands of unarmed civilians, including women and children (many during mass executions), and maimed countless others through its “ ‘particularly vicious practice of cutting off ears, noses, hands, arms, and legs of noncombatants as a deliberate terror tactic ... ’ ” J.A. at 26-27 (quoting 1999 Country Report). Women were systematically raped by members of the rebel group, and men who refused to rape their own family members had limbs amputated. The IJ found that “the RUF carried out a pattern of abducting those from the outside who demonstrated any special capabilities: ‘Rebel forces abducted civilians, missionaries, aid workers from nongovernmental agencies, U.N. personnel, and journalists.’ ” J.A. at 27 (quoting 1999 Country Report). Likewise, they deliberately targeted and murdered “ ‘government officials, human rights activists, religious leaders, and lawyers as they entered Freetown.’ ” J.A. at 27 (quoting 1999 Country Report).
The Sierra Leone government, though clearly not as brutal as the RUF, also had “serious problems” reflected in its human rights record. J.A. at 29. The 1999 Country Report recounts incidents of extrajudicial killings, summary executions of suspected rebels and suspected rebel collaborators, beatings of noncombatants, as well as arbitrary arrest and detention of persons. Furthermore, “discrimination based on ethnic origin [was] widely practiced .... ” J.A. at 29.
As an initial matter, the IJ determined that akin to the Taliban in Afghanistan and the Israeli Defense Forces in Palestinian Lands, the RUF should be considered a “political official” (or “government”) for purposes of the CAT, and therefore that Kamara’s claim for protection against torture by the RUF should be heard on the merits. See 8 C.F.R. § 208.18(a)(1) (stating that to receive protection under CAT, applicant must show that torture will be “inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity”). The IJ then concluded that based on the testimony of Kamara and his niece, and the “ample evidence of gross, flagrant, or mass violations of human rights in Sierra Leone ... it is more likely than not that respondent will be tortured if returned to Sierra Leone today.” J.A. at 30 (internal citation and quotations omitted).
The IJ reasoned that “[i]f the respondent should fall into the RUF’s hands, torture is all but certain.” J.A. at 28. Kamara’s family had already suffered a great deal at the hands of the RUF. The family home was burned down, Kamara’s cousin had his hands chopped off, his aunt was shot, the same aunt’s husband died while trapped in a house that was set on fire by the RUF, and Kamara’s brother-in-law, who has since died, had many properties destroyed, including the Muslim school that he founded. Kamara’s mother, sister, and aunt joined the “more than 1 million citizens” who fled the country or were internally displaced. J.A. at 27.
The IJ, reiterating his findings following the first hearing, also found that the relevant facts made “reasonable and altogether plausible [Kamara’s] concern that he will be singled out by the government for abusive treatment in violation of his personal security if he is deported there” because of his prior protests in Cuba twenty years before. J.A. at 29. The IJ noted additionally that Kamara will be highly noticeable “because of his long absence from the country coupled with his being among the small minority of elites in the country [which is only 20% literate] (by reason of education, family background, wealth, and experience abroad).” J.A. at 30.
Balancing the very “real” probability that Kamara may fall into RUF hands (and the “certain” torture that would result) with the “nearly certain” probability that Kamara will fall into the government’s hands, (and the “reasonable” chance of “abusive treatment in violation of his personal security” that would result), the IJ found that Kamara’s application for relief under the CAT should be granted. J.A. at 28-29. Given the additional fact finding, the IJ also clarified the facts surrounding Kamara’s petition for withholding of removal, in the event that the BIA decided to revisit the issue on appeal. See 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(3). The IJ noted, however, that the BIA’s law of the case precluded him from granting withholding of removal at that stage in the proceedings.
The INS once again appealed the decision of the IJ, and on April 5, 2002, in a six paragraph decision, the BIA sustained the appeal. The Board first reasoned that, given the IJ’s findings that “it cannot be found to be more likely than not that [the respondent] would find himself in the RUF’s hands,” there was no reason to discuss the likelihood of torture by the RUF or whether the RUF constitutes a government for purposes of the CAT. J.A. at 37. The BIA then concluded that Ka-mara failed to meet his burden of proof that he would face “torture” at the hands of the Sierra Leone government. J.A. at 37-38 (stating that “ ‘abusive-treatment’ vi-olative of one’s ‘personal security’ does not constitute torture, as defined by the regulations”) (citing 8 C.F.R. § 208.18(a)).
On April 23, 2002, Kamara filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the Middle District of Pennsylvania, challenging the decision of the BIA. The District Court granted the writ, holding that “[t]he cursory and erroneous review of this case by the [BIA] violated Kamara’s right to due process of law,” and that “[w]hen the [CAT] regulations are properly construed, the undisputed evidence was sufficient to meet the requirements for relief.” J.A. at 70-71. The Court also held that deporting Kamara to Sierra Leone would violate Kamara’s substantive due process rights under the “state-created danger” exception. See, e.g., Kneipp v. Tedder, 95 F.3d 1199, 1208 (3d Cir.1996). Finally, the Court issued a permanent injunction against removal. DHS filed a timely notice of appeal on June 9, 2004.
II.
Jurisdiction / Standard of Review A. Jurisdiction
Until May 11 of this year, an alien convicted of an aggravated felony and removable on such grounds was statutorily barred from filing a petition for review in the court of appeals challenging the BIA’s finding that s/he was ineligible for relief under the CAT. See 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(C); see also Bakhtriger v. Elwood, 360 F.3d 414, 420 (3d Cir.2004); Patel v. Ashcroft, 294 F.3d 465, 468 (3d Cir.2002). We held in Ogbudimkpa, however, that a district court retains jurisdiction to consider claims alleging violations of the CAT raised in a habeas corpus petition. 342 F.3d at 222; see also 28 U.S.C. § 2241.
This jurisdictional framework was radically overhauled on May 11, 2005, with the passage of the REAL ID Act of 2005, Pub.L. No. 109-13, 119 Stat. 231. The provision relevant to this appeal, Section 106(a) of the Act, amends 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2) to eliminate the district courts’ habeas corpus jurisdiction (28 U.S.C. §§ 2241, 1361, and 1651) over final orders of removal in nearly all cases. Section 106(a)(1)(B) provides that:
Notwithstanding any other provision of law (statutory or nonstatutory), including section 2241 of Title 28, or any other habeas corpus provision, and sections 1361 and 1651 of such title, a petition for review filed with an appropriate court of appeals in accordance with this section shall be the sole and exclusive means for judicial review of any cause or claim under the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Forms of Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section.
REAL ID Act § 106(a)(1)(B); 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(4). Section 106(a)(1)(A)(iii) of the Act, however, amends 8 U.S.C. § 1252 by adding a new provision, § 1252(a)(2)(D), which states that:
Nothing in subparagraph (B) or (C), or in any other provision of this Act (other than this section) which limits or eliminates judicial review, shall be construed as precluding review of constitutional claims or questions of law raised upon a petition for review filed with an appropriate court of appeals in accordance with this section.
8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(D). With this amendment,
Congress evidenced its intent to restore judicial review of constitutional claims and questions of law presented in petitions for review of final removal orders. This now permits all aliens, including criminal aliens, to obtain review of constitutional claims and questions of law upon filing of a petition for review with an appropriate court of appeals.
Papageorgiou v. Gonzales, 413 F.3d 356, 358 (3d Cir.2005); see also Fernandez-Ruiz v. Gonzales, 410 F.3d 585 (9th Cir.2005).
Congress explicitly made the above amendments retroactive. REAL ID Act § 106(b) provides that § 1252(a)(2)(D), “shall take effect upon the date of the enactment of this division and shall apply to cases in which the final administrative order of removal ... was issued before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this division.” See also Papageorgiou, 413 F.3d at 358.
Furthermore, habeas petitions filed under 28 U.S.C. § 2241, which as of May 11, 2005, were pending in the district courts, shall be transferred to
the court of appeals for the circuit in which a petition for review could have been properly filed under section 242(b)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. § 1252), as amended by this section.... The court of appeals shall treat the transferred case as if it had been filed pursuant to a petition for review under such section 242, except that subsection (b)(1) of such section [relating to the 30-day filing deadline] shall not apply.
REAL ID Act § 106(c).
The REAL ID Act is silent as to the exact procedural posture which faces us here, ie., an appeal from a district court’s habeas decision that is now pending before the court of appeals. Nonetheless, as explained in Bonkometre v. Gonzales, 414 F.3d 442 (3d Cir.2005),
Despite this silence, it is readily apparent, given Congress’ clear intent to have all challenges to removal orders heard in a single forum (the court of appeals), [H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 109-72] at 174 [ (2005) ], that those habeas petitions that were pending before this Court on the effective date of the REAL ID Act are properly converted to petitions for review and retained by this Court.
Id. at 445. To dismiss the present case would be arbitrary (by treating habeas petitions which are pending resolution in the district courts differently than habeas petitions where a decision has already been rendered, in many cases in favor of the alien) and is inconsistent with Congress’ express intent to provide aliens with one chance for judicial review in the court of appeals. See H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 109-72, at 174-76 (2005); cf. Sorrells v. United States, 287 U.S. 435, 450, 53 S.Ct. 210, 77 L.Ed. 413 (1932) (“To construe statutes so as to avoid absurd or glaringly unjust results, foreign to the legislative purpose, is, as we have seen, a traditional and appropriate function of the courts.”).
Thus, in light of the peculiar procedural posture of the present case, and the intervening passage of the REAL ID Act, we are obliged to vacate and disregard the District Court’s opinion and address the claims raised in Kamara’s habeas petition as if t

[truncated for spike corpus]